

===== PAGE 1 =====
PNAS  2023  Vol. 120  No. 44  e2313790120 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2313790120   1 of 5
RESEARCH ARTICLE | 
Significance
Use of AI in the production of 
text through Large Language 
Models (LLMs) is widespread 
and growing, with potential 
applications in journalism, 
copywriting, academia, and other 
writing tasks. As such, it is 
important to understand 
whether text produced or 
summarized by LLMs exhibits 
biases. The studies presented 
here demonstrate that the LLM 
ChatGPT- 3 reflects human biases 
for certain types of content in its 
production. The presence of 
these biases in LLM output has 
implications for its common use, 
as it may magnify human 
tendencies for content which 
appeals to these biases.
Author affiliations: aDepartment of Sociology and Social 
Research, University of Trento, Trento 38122, Italy; and 
bDepartment of Psychology, University of Winchester, 
Winchester SO22 4NR, United Kingdom
Author contributions: A.A. and J.M.S. designed research; 
A.A. and J.M.S. performed research; A.A. analyzed data; 
and A.A. and J.M.S. wrote the paper.
The authors declare no competing interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission.
Copyright © 2023 the Author(s). Published by PNAS. 
This article is distributed under Creative Commons 
Attribution- NonCommercial- NoDerivatives License 4.0 
(CC BY- NC- ND).
1To whom correspondence may be addressed. Email: 
alberto.acerbi@unitn.it.
This article contains supporting information online at 
https://www.pnas.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.  
2313790120/- /DCSupplemental.
Published October 26, 2023.
SOCIAL SCIENCES
COMPUTER SCIENCES
Large language models show human- like content biases 
in transmission chain experiments
Alberto Acerbia,1  and Joseph M. Stubbersfieldb
Edited by Marcus Feldman, Stanford University, Stanford, CA; received August 10, 2023; accepted September 26, 2023
As the use of large language models (LLMs) grows, it is important to examine whether 
they exhibit biases in their output. Research in cultural evolution, using transmission 
chain experiments, demonstrates that humans have biases to attend to, remember, and 
transmit some types of content over others. Here, in five preregistered experiments using 
material from previous studies with human participants, we use the same, transmission 
chain- like methodology, and find that the LLM ChatGPT- 3 shows biases analogous to 
humans for content that is gender- stereotype- consistent, social, negative, threat- related, 
and biologically counterintuitive, over other content. The presence of these biases in 
LLM output suggests that such content is widespread in its training data and could 
have consequential downstream effects, by magnifying preexisting human tendencies 
for cognitively appealing and not necessarily informative, or valuable, content.
cultural evolution | large language models | ChatGPT | content biases | transmission chains
Research on algorithmic bias has highlighted how the application of machine learning 
techniques to corpora generated by humans is likely to reproduce the biases present in the 
corpora (1). As large language models (LLMs) like ChatGPT have been recently opened 
to the broad public, with potential applications in journalism (2), copywriting (3), academia 
(4), and other writing tasks (5), and as they are trained on previous textual material produced 
mostly by humans, it is important to understand whether and how they would reflect those 
biases. T ools like ChatGPT (GPT stand for Generative Pre- trained T ransformer), provide 
a way of interacting that has become widespread in recent years (text- based chat) and that 
could greatly expand the user base of LLMs. In addition, they produce replies that feel as 
“natural” stories or narratives where those biases can be not immediately evident but per-
vasive in their effects (6).
T o investigate this, we applied a method generally used with human participants: the 
method of serial reproduction, or “transmission chain” setup. This method has a long history 
in psychology (7) and has been lately revived in the cultural evolution framework (8, 9). In 
short, the transmission chain method is a laboratory version of the telephone game, where 
participants pass iteratively to each other a story (or a solution to a task), and the researchers 
can track how these are modified through the steps of the chain. One can do the same with 
an LLM, asking to summarize a story and then present in the next step the summarized 
version produced by the LLM to itself, and proceed iteratively, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
T ransmission chain experiments with human participants have shown that humans 
tend to preferentially preserve and transmit some content with respect to others (10). For 
example, in stories including both positively valenced and negatively valenced events, 
negative events tend to be transmitted and preserved more than positive ones, showing a 
possible negative bias in human cultural transmission (11).
We tested, in a fully preregistered analysis, OpenAI’s ChatGPT- 3 with the same material 
from five previous experiments with human participants to assess whether the LLM would 
show the same biases. In each experiment, the initial story was passed to ChatGTP- 3 with a 
short prompt (see Fig. 1) and the output produced was then presented again with the same 
prompt, iteratively. At each passage, we tracked the proportion of information retained: in 
particular, the information consistent (and inconsistent) with the bias in each experiment. For 
example, in the story of Fig. 1, some information is gender- stereotype consistent, while other 
is gender- stereotype inconsistent. In our analysis, we tested whether ChatGPT’s output would 
produce the same biases found in human participants. We used linear mixed- effects models 
(implemented in R with ref. 12) with the proportion of content retained as the outcome, the 
type of content as the predictor, and the step in the chain and the replication as random effects.
Results
The first experiment (13) compares gender- stereotype- consistent and gender- stereotype- 
inconsistent information, such as a wife cooking for a dinner party where the husband 
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 111.203.137.70 on October 5, 2025 from IP address 111.203.137.70.


===== PAGE 2 =====
2 of 5   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2313790120 pnas.org
invites its boss hoping for a promotion (gender- stereotype consist-
ent) and the same wife going out for drinks with friends before the 
dinner (gender- stereotype inconsistent—full texts of the original 
story, as well as of all material used in the other experiments are in 
SI Appendix). Successive iterations of the story with ChatGPT show 
that, as with human participants, stereotype- consistent information 
was reproduced more than stereotype- inconsistent information 
through the chain (β = 0.058, P < 0.01—see Fig. 2A ).
The second experiment (11) concerns negative versus positive 
information, with a story of a girl flying to Australia and, for 
example, sitting close to a man “with a nasty cold” (negative infor-
mation) or being moved to business class (positive information). 
As above, ChatGPT behaved consistently with human partici-
pants, reproducing more negative than positive information (β = 
0.117, P < 0.001—see Fig. 2B). This story also included ambig-
uous details (e.g., the protagonist sees a man “tak[ing] an old 
woman’s bag”) that could be resolved positively (a kind man help-
ing an older woman) or negatively (a thief stealing the bag). Even 
in this case, consistently with previous results with humans, these 
initially ambiguous details were mostly resolved negatively (β = 
0.183, P < 0.001—see Fig. 2C, dark gray is for details remaining 
ambiguous, and light gray is for positive resolutions).
The third experiment (14) examines the difference between 
social information (for example, a student having an affair with a 
professor) and nonsocial information (the student waking up late 
and missing a lecture, or the weather conditions). Human partic-
ipants were found to preferentially preserve social information, 
and ChatGPT produced results consistent with the experiments 
with humans (β = 0.321, P < 0.001—see Fig. 2D).
The fourth experiment (15) considers a specific type of negative 
information: information related to possible threats. The setup is 
slightly different here: Instead of a story, it presents a “consumer 
report” followed by statements to help a “friend [that] mentioned 
that he would like to purchase this product.” For example, one 
concerns a “new running shoe brand called Lancer™,” and the 
statements include, among others, “Lancer™’s strap design can 
cause sprained ankles when used for activities other than running” 
(threat- related information), “Lancer™ special fabric may smell 
if not cleaned properly” (negative information), or “Lancer™ cus-
tomization process analyzes the way you run” (neutral informa-
tion). In agreement with human participants, ChatGPT retained 
threat- related statements through the iterations, dropping nega-
tive and neutral ones (β = 0.523, P < 0.001—see Fig. 2E). When 
the negative content is tested against neutral, excluding threat-  
related content from the analysis, negativity predicts, as hypoth-
esized and as for humans’ results, retention through the chain  
(β = 0.070, P  < 0.005—see Fig. 2E, dark gray is negative, and 
light gray is neutral).
Finally, the fifth experiment (16) included material relevant to 
multiple possible content biases in two different narratives created 
for the original study and inspired by creation myths. Human par-
ticipants were found to preferentially transmit negative information 
(“Muki cried and cried, until the spark in the sky darted away”), 
social information (“The elder ones had not approved of their mar-
riage”), or counterintuitive information related to biological pro-
cesses (“the hairs of Pata’s chin became spiders and crawled up from 
their bed of clay”) versus other kinds of content (including content 
relevant to other biases), and the results for ChatGPT were consist-
ent with the human results (β = 0.076, P < 0.001—see Fig. 2F). 
Extended results, with outcomes for single biases and different sto-
ries within each experiment, are included in SI Appendix.
Discussion
Across five experiments, using the ChatGPT LLM to replicate 
previous transmission chain studies with human participants, we 
found that the information retained in outputs produced by the 
LLM was analogous to the information retained and transmitted 
by human participants. Consistent with preregistered hypotheses, 
text produced by ChatGPT reflected human content- based social 
transmission biases for stereotype consistency (experiment 1), neg-
ative information (experiment 2), social information (experiment 3),  
and threat- related information (experiment 4). In addition, it 
reflects human biases for negative, social, and biologically coun-
terintuitive content over other biases (experiment 5), and a bias 
for resolving ambiguous statements as negative (experiment 2).
Fig. 1. Basic experimental setup. A story with gender- stereotype- consistent information (orange) and gender- stereotype- inconsistent information (gray) is 
given to ChatGPT, after a short prompt that asks to summarize it. The proportion of consistent and inconsistent information reproduced is recorded, and the 
output is passed again to ChatGPT with the same prompt. The operation is iterated three times.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 111.203.137.70 on October 5, 2025 from IP address 111.203.137.70.


===== PAGE 3 =====
PNAS  2023  Vol. 120  No. 44  e2313790120 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2313790120   3 of 5
As such, we can expect that when LLMs generate new texts 
or are used to summarize preexisting text, their outputs will 
reflect these biases. It is important to note that the concept of 
bias we are using in this research is different from the common 
concept of “algorithmic bias,” which has a distinct negative con-
notation (17). In cultural evolution, transmission biases indicate 
that individuals are predisposed, on average, to adopt some cul-
tural variants over others, affecting their overall spread within 
populations (18). In this sense, biases are neither inherently good 
nor bad, and they are to be expected each time individuals choose 
among different cultural variants. This is reflected in the exper-
iments reported here, where some biases would be considered 
negative (e.g., the preference for stereotype- consistent informa-
tion in experiment 1) but others neutral, or possibly functional, 
as the bias toward threat- related information in experiment 4. 
For the same reason, however, those biases could be more diffi-
cult to recognize, and they could have consequential downstream 
effects, by magnifying the preexisting human tendencies. We 
might anticipate, for example, that without human intervention, 
LLMs could enable negative gender stereotypes to persist in 
potentially harmful ways. Additionally, given concerns over emo-
tional contagion in digital media (19), negativity, and threat bias 
in LLM- generated material could contribute to wider negativity 
and overestimation of threats in humans. If used to summarize 
scientific articles for the purposes of journalism (2), LLMs may 
focus on content which appeals to these biases rather than the 
truly pertinent, although not necessarily more so than a human 
editor. A key implication then is that it is important to recognize 
our own subtle biases and to understand that LLMs reflect these 
and do not act as neutral agents.
Research in cultural evolution suggests that content biases are 
present in humans as a result of biases in our cognition which lead 
us to preferentially attend to, recall, and/or transmit some types 
of information over others (10). In most cases, it is proposed that 
these biases are a result of evolved cognition, being on average 
adaptive, e.g., a bias for social information resulting from the 
fitness benefits of attending to and remembering such information 
within our social groups (14), or biases for negative and threat- 
 related information because not attending to such is more costly 
than not attending to positive information or benefits (15). Biases 
in the outputs of LLMs cannot be the result of such evolutionary 
processes; however, the human- produced training material is itself 
a product of a cultural evolutionary process where human content 
biases have led to the preferential retention and dissemination of 
information which align with those biases. Such content then is 
likely present in that training material and therefore reflected in 
the “biases” of the LLM. In the case of ChatGPT- 3, the training 
material was around 45 TB of text taken from multiple web- based 
sources including Wikipedia, books, and raw web page data (20). 
As such, the results of our study suggest that biases which have 
previously been tested experimentally, or within corpus analysis 
(21–24), can also be detected in the cultural artifacts used to train 
the LLM. It also suggests that the outputs of LLMs could be useful 
sources for studying broader human culture (although this will 
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
123
Chain step
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1 2345
Chain step
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
12 3
Chain step
Proportion retained
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
123
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
123
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
12 3
Proportion retained
B C
DE F
A
Fig. 2. Proportion of the original information retained by ChatGPT at each chain step in the experiments. Orange line is information consistent with the bias 
found in humans. (A) Gender- stereotype- consistent (orange) versus gender- stereotype- inconsistent (gray) information in experiment 1. (B) Negative (orange) 
versus positive (gray) information in Experiment 2. (C) Ambiguity resolutions in experiment 2: negative (orange) versus positive (light gray) and ambiguous (dark 
gray). (D) Social (orange) versus nonsocial (gray) information in experiment 3. (E) Threat- related (orange) versus negative (dark gray) and neutral (light gray) in 
experiment 4. (F) Counterintuitive biological, social and negative information (orange) versus other biases (gray) in experiment 5. All data are average of five 
replications, bars show SDs.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 111.203.137.70 on October 5, 2025 from IP address 111.203.137.70.


===== PAGE 4 =====
4 of 5   https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2313790120 pnas.org
depend significantly on how outputs are constrained by other 
processes).
While overall the results here are consistent with the outcomes 
of the original experiments, there are some interesting minor dif-
ferences which likely reflect the differing mechanisms which 
produce the biased outputs. One such difference was the higher 
retention of “gossip” over standard social information. In the orig-
inal study (14), no difference was found between gossip (defined 
as information about intense third- party social relationships) and 
nongossip social information, and both were equally well retained 
over nonsocial information about an individual or the physical 
environment. In our study (experiment 3), gossip had a significant 
advantage over standard social information (SI Appendix, Fig. S2), 
largely explaining the prominence of overall social information. 
This could be a result of the LLM having a stronger bias towards 
emotive social information than emotionally neutral social infor-
mation, possibly particularly towards negatively valanced social 
information (as the gossip story in experiment 3 was mostly neg-
ative, see full text in SI Appendix). Relative importance of different 
biases, and how they may combine, is something which could be 
tested for directly in future studies.
A second difference was in the retention of stereotype- consistent 
information. In the original study (13), while stereotype- consistent 
information was preferentially retained across the overall chain, 
earlier chain steps showed an advantage for stereotype- inconsistent 
information. Later research suggested that a bias for stereotype- 
 consistent information is a product of communicative intent, rather 
than memory (25). No such pattern was found in our study (exper-
iment 1), rather, stereotype- consistent information was preferen-
tially retained from the first chain step. This could be a consequence 
of the different mechanisms which produce biases in humans and 
LLMs. While content biases in humans may be present in attention, 
memory, or transmission, and may vary across these three phases 
(10), a bias in an LLM can only be a product of its training material. 
If the training material was predominantly stereotype consistent, 
this will be reflected in the outputs.
Similarly to the corresponding experiments with humans, most 
of the text transformation happened in the first step of the trans-
mission chain. After that, the model converges on a broadly (but 
not completely) stable version of the story, which is repeated in the 
next two steps. On the one hand, this result implies that the trans-
mission chain methodology is not necessary per se to produce the 
biases in the LLM, but a single process of summarization (which 
would be anyway the most common usage) is sufficient. On the 
other hand, it suggests the possibility of experimenting with differ-
ent prompts. Our prompt required to summarize a text, producing 
a mostly subtractive transformation, i.e., information from the text 
is discarded, but future research could test prompts asking to elab-
orate the text, make it funny, or appealing for a particular audience, 
possibly producing more variation among chain steps.
The results of this study could be expanded by examining the 
potential impact of different prompts. Here, the prompt was 
“Please summarize this story making sure to make it shorter, if 
necessary you can omit some information.” We did not directly test 
the influence of different prompt wording on output, and it is 
unlikely that this prompt would produce the hypothesized biases 
alone. It is virtually impossible, however, to know beforehand how 
slight changes in wording or syntactic structure in the prompt 
could influence the output of the model. Future research could 
examine how, and to what extent, prompt wording influences the 
reflection of biases in LLM output, by systematically testing var-
iations of baseline prompts. Further, future research should test 
biases across multiple stories (as in experiment 5) and examine 
interactions between prompt wording and story content or struc-
ture in the reflection of biases.
A limitation of our study is that, due to the rapid development 
and diversification of LLMs, our results may not generalize beyond 
ChatGPT- 3. ChatGPT- 4’s training was similar to ChatGPT- 3, so 
may reflect the same biases but includes reinforcement learning using 
human feedback in an attempt to prevent the LLM from producing 
output which violates OpenAI’s policy on harmful behavior and to 
mitigate harmful biases. However, small- scale experiments with early 
versions of ChatGPT- 4 suggest that it still generates biased outcomes 
based on gender stereotypes (26). T o what extent it would reflect this 
bias in summarizing text, as tested here, or the other biases examined 
here is unknown. Given the similarity in training, however, and that 
outside of gender stereotypes the biases tested here are unlikely to be 
considered harmful, it is plausible to expect that these biases would 
still be present in later generations of LLMs.
Materials and Methods
We used the 9 January 2023 version of OpenAI’s ChatGPT- 3 language model 
(publicly available at: https://chat.openai.com/), with default parameters val-
ues, to run a series of experiments using transmission chains methodology. We 
selected five studies (11, 13–16) that highlighted in human participants differ -
ent content biases and that made use of single stories with different biases (as 
opposed to experiments that used two or more stories with different biases). In 
one case (study 3), we modified the original material, which consisted in four 
stories testing four different biases, creating a single story.
We used the same material (stories) of the original experiments (see 
SI Appendix for details and full texts). The material was presented in ChatGPT 
with the prompt:
Please summarize this story making sure to make it shorter, if necessary you 
can omit some information: **story**
For each study, we run five different chains/replications, and each chain/repli-
cation consisted of three steps. In each chain, the original story was presented with 
the prompt above; the output produced by ChatGPT was then presented again 
with the same prompt (step 2), and the process was iterated a last time (step 3). 
(The setup is slightly different for study 4, see SI Appendix). The number of chains/
replications and of steps was chosen after pretests showing a limited variability 
of ChatGPT’s outputs given the same prompt, and that the main modification of 
the material was happening in the first step of the chain.
The general hypothesis we tested is that ChatGPT’s output would produce the 
same biases found in human subjects. While the original studies use different 
statistical analyses, we decided to have the same general analytic strategy for 
all studies. We used linear mixed- effects models with the proportion of content 
retained as the outcome, the type of content as the predictor, and the step in the 
chain and the replication as random effects. Using the R package lme4, (12) the 
general formula can be written as:
lmer(proportion ∼ content + (1/uni007C.varchain_step)+ (1/uni007C.varchain_id)).
The coding consisted in determining the presence or absence of basic infor -
mation from the original story. In experiments 1, 3, and 5, where the information 
consistent with human bias was represented by more than one category of infor-
mation (e.g., in experiment 1, the categories “plot- relevant male stereotype- 
consistent,” “plot- relevant female stereotype- consistent,” “background male 
stereotype- consistent,” and “background female stereotype- consistent” were 
all part of the stereotype- consistent information predicted to be advantaged), a 
weighted average of the categories retained was considered (outputs of the single 
categories for each experiment are in SI Appendix). Similarly, a weighted average 
was considered when an experiment involved more than one story (experiments 
4 and 5—outputs of single stories are in SI Appendix). ChatGPT’s output was coded 
by A.A. (studies 1, 2, and 4) and by J.M.S. (studies 3 and 5). A third independent 
coder, unaware of the experimental procedure and of the predictions, double- 
coded studies 1, 2, 3, and 5 (study 4 did not need double coding as the procedure 
is slightly different—see SI Appendix). Interrater reliability was generally high, and 
it is reported in SI Appendix, Table S1.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 111.203.137.70 on October 5, 2025 from IP address 111.203.137.70.


===== PAGE 5 =====
PNAS  2023  Vol. 120  No. 44  e2313790120 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2313790120   5 of 5
Detailed hypotheses and implementations for each study as well as how the 
outputs were coded are reported in SI Appendix. The preregistration, plus all the 
original data, coding, and R scripts to perform the analysis and visualizations are 
available in an OSF (Open Science Framework) repository: https://osf.io/6v2ps/ (27).
Data, Materials, and Software Availability.  The preregistration, plus 
all the original data, coding, and R scripts to perform the analysis and 
visualizations. Data have been deposited in ChatGPT transmission chains 
(https://osf.io/6v2ps/) (27).
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. We would like to thank Fabiana Lombardi for her work as 
an independent coder, and two anonymous reviewers for comments and sugges-
tions. J.M.S. received internal funding from the University of Winchester Research 
and Innovation funds for this research.
1. A. Caliskan, J. J. Bryson, A. Narayanan, Semantics derived automatically from language corpora 
contain human- like biases. Science 356, 183–186 (2017).
2. S. Petridis et al., “AngleKindling: Supporting journalistic angle ideation with large language 
models” in Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 
CHI’23, A. Schmidt et al., Eds. (Association for Computing Machinery, 2023), pp. 1–16.
3. G. Chen, P . Xie, J. Dong, T. Wang, Understanding programmatic creative: The role of AI. J. Advert. 48, 
347–355 (2019).
4. O. “Oz” Buruk, Academic writing with GPT- 3.5: Reflections on practices, efficacy and transparency. 
arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.11079 (Accessed 27 June 2023).
5. R. Dale, GPT- 3: What’s it good for? Nat. Lang. Eng. 27, 113–118 (2021).
6. L. Lucy, D. Bamman, “Gender and representation bias in GPT- 3 generated stories” in Proceedings of 
the Third Workshop on Narrative Understanding, N. Akoury et al., Eds. (Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 2021), pp. 48–55.
7. F. C. Bartlett, Remembering (Cambridge University Press, 1932).
8. A. Mesoudi, A. Whiten, The multiple roles of cultural transmission experiments in understanding 
human cultural evolution. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London Ser. B 363, 3489–3501 (2008).
9. B. Thompson, B. van Opheusden, T. Sumers, T. L. Griffiths, Complex cognitive algorithms preserved 
by selective social learning in experimental populations. Science 376, 95–98 (2022).
10. J. M. Stubbersfield, Content biases in three phases of cultural transmission: A review. Cult. Evol. 19, 
41–60 (2022).
11. K. Bebbington, C. MacLeod, T. M. Ellison, N. Fay, The sky is falling: evidence of a negativity bias in 
the social transmission of information. Evol. Hum. Behav. 38, 92–101 (2017).
12. D. Bates, M. Mächler, B. Bolker, S. Walker, Fitting linear mixed- effects models using lme4. J. Stat. 
Softw. 67, 1–48 (2015).
13. Y. Kashima, Maintaining cultural stereotypes in the serial reproduction of narratives. Pers. Soc. 
Psychol. Bull. 26, 594–604 (2000).
14. A. Mesoudi, A. Whiten, R. Dunbar, A bias for social information in human cultural transmission. 
Br. J. Psychol. 97, 405–423 (2006).
15. T. Blaine, P . Boyer, Origins of sinister rumors: A preference for threat- related material in the supply 
and demand of information. Evol. Hum. Behav. 39, 67–75 (2018).
16. R. E. W. Berl, A. N. Samarasinghe, S. G. Roberts, F. M. Jordan, M. C. Gavin, Prestige and content 
biases together shape the cultural transmission of narratives. Evol. Hum. Sci. 3, e42  
(2021).
17. D. Danks, A. J. London, “Algorithmic bias in autonomous systems” in Proceedings of the Twenty- 
Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, C. Sierra, Ed. (International Joint 
Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization, 2017), pp. 4691–4697.
18. R. Boyd, P . J. Richerson, Culture and the Evolutionary Process (University of Chicago Press, 
1985).
19. A. Goldenberg, J. J. Gross, Digital emotion contagion. Trends Cogn. 24, 316–328 (2020).
20. T. Brown et al., “Language models are few- shot learners” in Advances in Neural Information 
Processing Systems, H. Larochelle, M.'A. Ranzato, R. Hadsell, M.- F. Balcan, H.- T. Lin, Eds. 
(Curran Associates Inc., 2020), pp. 1877–1901.
21. J. M. Stubbersfield, E. G. Flynn, J. J. Tehrani, Cognitive evolution and the transmission of popular 
narratives: A literature review and application to urban legends. Evol. Stud. Imaginative Culture 
1, 121–136 (2017).
22. A. Acerbi, Cognitive attraction and online misinformation. Palgrave Commun. 5, 15 (2019).
23. O. Morin, A. Acerbi, Birth of the cool: A two- centuries decline in emotional expression in 
Anglophone fiction. Cogn. Emot. 31, 1663–1675 (2017).
24. C. O. Brand, A. Acerbi, A. Mesoudi, Cultural evolution of emotional expression in 50 years of song 
lyrics. Evol. Hum. Sci. 1, e11 (2019).
25. A. Lyons, Y. Kashima, Maintaining stereotypes in communication: Investigating memory biases and 
coherence- seeking in storytelling. Asian J. Soc. Psychol. 9, 59–71 (2006).
26. S. Bubeck et al., Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence: Early experiments with GPT- 4. arXiv 
[Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.12712 (Accessed 30 June 2023).
27. A. Acerbi, J. M. Stubbersfield, chatGPT transmission chains. chatGPT transmission chains. https://osf.
io/6v2ps/. Deposited 17 July 2023.
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 111.203.137.70 on October 5, 2025 from IP address 111.203.137.70.
