

===== PAGE 1 =====
PERSPECTIVE
OPEN ACCESS
Can Generative AI improve social science?
Christopher A. Baila,b,c,1
Edited by David Lazer, Northeastern University, Boston, MA; received September 7, 2023; accepted April 5, 2024, by Editorial Board Member
Mark Granovetter
Generative AI that can produce realistic text, images,
and other human-like outputs is currently transforming
many diﬀerent industries. Yet it is not yet known how
such tools might influence social science research. I argue
Generative AI has the potential to improve survey re-
search, online experiments, automated content analyses,
agent-based models, and other techniques commonly
used to study human behavior. In the second section of
this article, I discuss the many limitations of Generative
AI. I examine how bias in the data used to train these
tools can negatively impact social science research—as
well as a range of other challenges related to ethics,
replication, environmental impact, and the proliferation
of low-quality research. I conclude by arguing that social
scientists can address many of these limitations by cre-
ating open-source infrastructure for research on human
behavior. Such infrastructure is not only necessary to
ensure broad access to high-quality research tools, I
argue, but also because the progress of AI will require
deeper understanding of the social forces that guide
human behavior.
Generative AI | computational social science | agent-based model |
survey research | algorithmic bias
Generative AI—technology capable of producing realistic
text, images, music, and other creative forms—continues to
captivate large audiences. Many speculate such technology
will impact a range of industries and scientific disciplines—
from creative and legal writing to computational biology. Yet
sociologists, political scientists, economists, and other social
scientists are only beginning to explore how Generative AI will
transform their research. In this article, I argue these tools
may advance the scale, scope, and speed of social science
research—and may enable new forms of scientific inquiry
as well. At the same time, I assess the many limitations of
Generative AI for social science research—and discuss how
scholars can mitigate risks while exploring this promising new
technology.
In the first section of this article, I provide a brief history
of Generative AI for social scientists. In the second section,
I ask whether Generative AI can eﬀectively simulate human
behavior for the purposes of social science research. I assess
whether these tools can be useful for survey research, or
creating experimental primes within online experiments.
Next, I review recent studies that employ Generative AI
models to simulate dynamic human behaviors. These include
experiments where human respondents interact with Gener-
ative AI, or simulations where researchers prompt models to
interact with each other to study emergent group behaviors.
I argue such research may help social scientists begin to
reverse engineer the “social sense” of human beings—or
how we create shared understandings of acceptable behavior
in diﬀerent social milieux. Finally, I argue Generative AI
has the potential to transform automated text analysis.
Since Generative AI tools can analyze very large groups of
documents in many diﬀerent languages with great speed, I
propose they may significantly expand the range of research
questions that social scientists can study.
In the third section of this article, I turn to the various
limitations and potential dangers associated with Generative
AI. Much of the public discourse surrounding this new
technology focuses on the possibility of a “singularity” where
AI models supersede human intelligence and threaten our
well-being. Many scholars believe such concerns eschew well-
documented social harms that are already occurring in the
short term (1). These include the tendency of Generative
AI to exhibit strong bias against stigmatized groups, spread
misinformation, and potentially exacerbate social inequality
or climate change—among other negative outcomes. I dis-
cuss how these issues may negatively impact the quality,
eﬀiciency, interpretability, and replicability of social science
research as well—and generate new questions about ethics
and the protection of human subjects. I also evaluate the
potential of these models to generate and disseminate “junk
science” which could impede scientific inquiry for years to
come. Mitigating each of these risks is challenging, I argue,
because the processes used to train Generative AI are largely
opaque—and accurate tools for detecting AI-generated con-
tent are not yet eﬀective at scale.
In the final section of this article, I argue that social
scientists can address many of the challenges of research
with Generative AI by creating our own open-source
infrastructure (2). By developing our own Generative AI
models, social scientists can more eﬀectively diagnose how
the model training process impacts scientific analysis of
human behavior and ensure these new tools evolve according
to the interest of science, and not only the corporations that
produce many of the most popular models at present. Most
importantly, I argue open-source infrastructure could create
a community of scholars that work to identify best practices
Author aﬀiliations: aDepartment of Sociology, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708;
bDepartment of Political Science, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708; and cDepartment
of Public Policy, Duke University, Durham, NC 27708
Author contributions: C.A.B. designed research; performed research; contributed new
reagents/analytic tools; and wrote the paper.
The author declares no competing interest.
This article is a PNAS Direct Submission. D.L. is a guest editor invited by the Editorial Board.
Copyright © 2024 the Author(s). Published by PNAS. This open access article is distributed
under Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License 4.0 (CC
BY-NC-ND).
1Email: christopher.bail@duke.edu.
This article contains supporting information online at https://www.pnas.org/lookup/
suppl/doi:10.1073/pnas.2314021121/-/DCSupplemental.
Published May 9, 2024.
PNAS 2024 Vol. 121 No. 21 e2314021121 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2314021121 1 of 10
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 111.203.137.70 on October 5, 2025 from IP address 111.203.137.70.


===== PAGE 2 =====
for research with Generative AI, prevent these tools from
reproducing the academic caste system, and allow social sci-
entists to develop solutions to future challenges and prevent
these tools from being repurposed for malicious purposes.
Several caveats are in order. First, my analysis is limited
to social science and thus does not engage with the many
diﬀerent ways Generative AI might shape other fields. Sec-
ond, I focus on the impact of Generative AI on scientific
research, and not its broader impact on social life—a topic
that is certainly worthy of another analysis. Third, the field
of Generative AI research is changing so rapidly that any
attempt to take stock of its potential will become out of
date quickly—as well as information about its possible risks
or dangers. Indeed, many of the studies I discuss below
are preprints that have not yet undergone rigorous peer
review, and may therefore fail to replicate. I therefore urge
readers to take caution in evaluating the potential of the
research techniques described below, which may yet be
judged scientifically unsound, unethical, or both through a
more systematic future review. Third, I do not provide a
technical discussion of how Generative AI models work, since
these are broadly available elsewhere (3). Instead of a “user’s
guide” for Generative AI in social science research, I hope
to inspire ongoing dialog among researchers about how this
new technology should be used to study human behavior in
diﬀerent settings.
What is Generative AI?
The term “Generative AI” describes a broad set of tools
developed by researchers in statistics, computer science, and
engineering that are sometimes called “Foundation Models.”
At a high level, the term demarcates a shift in the use
of machine learning technology from pattern recognition—
where tools are created to identify latent patterns in text,
images, or other unstructured datasets—toward the genera-
tion of free-form text, images, and video, via algorithms that
are trained on large datasets, often collected from online
sources. Large language models (LLMs) such as ChatGPT
ingest vast amounts of text-based data, and identify the
probability that a word (or set of words) will occur given the
presence of other language patterns within a passage of text.
As technology progressed to allow AI researchers to train
such models on progressively larger amounts of text—and
with powerful new “transformer” architectures—tools such
as GPT-3 became more adept at predicting the language
most likely to follow diﬀerent “prompts”—short pieces of text
designed to shape the LLM’s outputs, such as a question.
LLMs thus resemble the “autocomplete” technologies that
have become pervasive on search engines, apps, and other
digital spaces over the past decade, but with considerably
greater scale and more sophisticated training processes that
are described in additional detail below. Though scholars
debate whether LLMs “understand” the output they produce,
many are impressed by their capacity to mimic humans
in conversational settings, synthesize disparate sources of
information, and perform basic reasoning (4–6).
Parallel advancements have been made with image—and,
to a lesser extent, video. Instead of calculating the probability
of words given other words, Generative AI tools that create
de novo images use the co-occurrence of pixels of diﬀerent
colors or sizes to weave together a range of synthetic visuals.
These include synthetic human faces, reproductions of classic
artwork, or surreal—and at times quite innovative—forms of
art that have provoked both excitement and concern among
people in creative industries (1). Models such as DALL-E
and Stable Diﬀusion create such visual content through text
prompts—searching for connections between patterns in the
co-occurrence of words and the arrangement of pixels—that
allow a user to request highly specialized visual content.
Opportunities for Social Science with
Generative AI
Despite—or perhaps because of—their significant flaws, Gen-
erative AI models appear capable of impersonating humans
in some settings. The computer scientist Alan Turing was
among the first to propose evaluating AI by identifying
whether humans can distinguish content produced by people
or AI. Using GPT-2, a precursor to ChatGPT that produces
much lower quality texts, Kreps et al. studied whether
research participants could diﬀerentiate short statements
about U.S. foreign policy generated by this LLM and human
respondents (7). They found GPT-2 could successfully imper-
sonate humans, and can even write lengthy news stories
about international aﬀairs that are judged to be as credible
as those authored by real journalists. In a more recent study,
Jakesch et al. examined whether human survey respondents
could discern whether texts about job postings and online
dating profiles were created by humans or LLMs (5). They
show humans are largely unable to determine whether
such texts are authored by humans or LLMs in a series of
experiments. Finally, Zhou et al. show that GPT-3 can easily
produce misinformation about COVID-19 that can escape
detection by most social media platforms (8). More recent
studies indicate AI-generated content can influence human
attitudes, even if it is false or misleading (9, 10).
Despite the obvious potential for harm when Generative AI
successfully impersonates humans, these same capabilities
may be useful to social scientists for research purposes. For
example, social science experiments often include texts or
images designed to prime human respondents to behave in a
certain manner, or exhibit some type of feeling. A researcher
interested in studying how emotions shape responsiveness
to political advertising campaigns, for example, may wish to
show respondent texts or images designed to create fear
before asking them about their voting intentions. Or, a re-
searcher who aims to evaluate racial discrimination in hiring
may wish to show research participants two images—one
that features a Caucasian job applicant and another that de-
picts an African American job candidate—and subsequently
evaluate participant’s perceptions of the employability of the
two candidates, ceteris paribus. Generative AI may be useful
for creating such vignettes and/or images—especially with
iterative feedback from researchers—to increase the external
validity and comparability of those primes, or to protect the
privacy of real humans whose images might be used in such
studies.
Creating a compelling piece of short text or a single
image is a relatively low-bar for Generative AI to pass
(and one where it still often fails). Shorter texts provide
fewer opportunities for Generative AI tools to make errors
or hallucinate untruths (or half truths) that decrease their
capacity to impersonate a human. Yet there is also evidence
that Generative AI performs reasonably well at more complex
human behaviors. For example, Argyle et al. indicate GPT-
3 can accurately impersonate respondents to a nationally
representative public opinion survey from a range of dif-
ferent demographic backgrounds (11). Prompting such tools
with details about the characteristics of a respondent, for
2 of 10 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2314021121 pnas.org
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 111.203.137.70 on October 5, 2025 from IP address 111.203.137.70.


===== PAGE 3 =====
example, makes them respond to public opinion surveys in
a manner that is very similar to real respondents with the
same attributes. Some argue such “silicon samples” could be
used to produce more diverse samples than the convenience
samples utilized by so many university researchers—and
may also allow researchers to administer lengthier survey
instruments, since LLMs have potentially unlimited attention
spans (12). At the same time, more recent research indi-
cates GPT 3.5 turbo produces accurate mean estimates of
attitudes within a population, but understates variances—
exaggerating extreme attitudes (13). Another study indicates
LLMs exhibit an aﬀirmative bias in yes/no questions (14).
Studies also indicate LLMs represent some demographic
subgroups more accurately than others (13, 15). Yet these
studies do not employ the latest models, and only focus on
one country: the United States. Understanding diﬀerences
between how LLMs and humans respond to surveys may
be doubly important because these tools are being trained
to impersonate respondents by malicious actors seeking to
game the survey industry (16). Though silicon samples will
not soon displace survey research with human respondents,
they may still be very useful for pretesting surveys before
they are dispatched (at considerable cost) to large groups of
human respondents, or imputing missing data (11, 17). Some
argue Generative AI is also a useful tool for creating survey
questions, or designing multi-item scales to measure abstract
social concepts (18).
There is also evidence that Generative AI can be used
to reproduce experiments. Horton, for example, argues
synthetic research respondents created using GPT-3 can
be used to reproduce several classic studies in behavioral
economics (19). Similarly, Aher et al. show that GPT-3 can also
reproduce classic social psychology experiments—including
the infamous Milgram experiment—though they argue it
cannot reproduce the “wisdom of crowds” phenomenon
(20). Still other studies indicate LLMs can replicate classic
experiments in cognitive science and the study of morality
and replicate human behavior in the Prisoner’s Dilemma
and other behavioral games (21–24). Ashokkumar et al. find
the correlation between treatment eﬀects observed in 482
studies and responses created by GPT-4 is 0.86. Furthermore,
they find this correlation holds for both published and
unpublished studies, and across demographic subgroups
(25). The capacity of Generative AI to impersonate humans
may thus improve as model size increases, and as researchers
experiment with prompting LLMs with even richer forms of
data such as in-depth qualitative interviews or detailed life
histories. I discuss the challenge of protecting user privacy in
such eﬀorts in further detail below.
Whether Generative AI can successfully impersonate hu-
mans in more complex social settings such as interpersonal
conversations is much less clear. This is an important ques-
tion since the Turing test is most often administered in a
setting where a human can interact—and ask questions of—
both an AI chatbot and a human in order to distinguish
them from each other. Early attempts to create chatbots that
could pass the Turing test largely failed. Rule-based chatbots
such as ELIZA, the 1968 invention that delivered Rogerian
psychotherapy by identifying keywords in user input and
linking them to sets of responses that encouraged them
to self-reflect, lacked the capacity to respond to emergent
or dynamic conversational turns in a compelling manner.
Chatbots that followed such simple rules were eventually
displaced by those which learn from natural language use
in the 2000s and 2010s. But until recently, these chatbots
also appeared incapable of passing the Turing test, since
they struggled to generate original content and frequently
redirected conversations—or failed to follow other conven-
tions in human conversation that made them fairly easy to
identify. Generative AI holds the potential to create more
realistic human-like interactions given that many such tools
are trained on larger amounts of data that describe human
interactions—and also because of recent technical innova-
tions (e.g., transformer models).
A crude test of the capacity of Generative AI to generate
plausibly human behavior in social settings is multiplayer
online games. Though such games certainly do not simulate
the full range of human behaviors that are of interest to social
scientists, they may provide a useful baseline to evaluate the
performance of these tools in more complex settings. Prior
to the advent of Generative AI, believable characters in video
games were created via simple rules, or via “reinforcement
learning” where AI characters adapt their behavior based
upon past experiences with human players. Key to such
behavior was a system where AI agents could recall prior
events—or exhibit a working memory. Such AI has been
commonplace in video games for some time, and AI systems
have even surpassed the capabilities of human players in
a variety of more simple games such as Backgammon,
Chess, and AlphaGo for many years. More recently, however,
researchers have shown that LLMs can also learn to use
natural language in games that require complex reasoning
and high-level strategy to defeat human players, such as
Diplomacy (26, 27).
Another line of research examines how the introduction
of AI agents in multiplayer games shapes the behavior of
the humans they play with. Dell’Aqua, Kogut, and Perkowski
study a collaborative cooking game where AI’s performance
is known to exceed that of human players (28). When an
AI agent is introduced in a team setting, the researchers
find that human agents perform more poorly when the
agent is on their team, compared to an all-human team.
The authors argue the introduction of the AI agent makes
coordination more diﬀicult for human players—and also
creates less trust among members of the team. Conversely,
Traeger et al. find automated agents that are trained to
perform poorly at collaborative tasks can actually improve the
behavior of human team members (29). It is possible that AI
which completes tasks with greater skill than humans creates
frustration and in-fighting, whereas AI that demonstrates less
competence encourages human empathy and collaboration
to overcome poor group performance.
If groups of automated agents can create believable group
behavior when dispatched in unison, this may enable new
forms of research as well. Many social science theories de-
scribe group-level processes that shape individual behavior.
But recruiting large groups of people to interact is often logis-
tically impossible, prohibitively expensive—or both. Though
Generative AI may never replicate the spontaneous behavior
of human groups, researchers may nevertheless be able to
dispatch groups of bots in online spaces to approximate
such behavior. Allamong et al. provide a proof of concept
of such research (30). These researchers were interested
in studying how social media users behave when they are
surrounded by people who do not share their political
views. But recruiting social media users with heterogeneous
beliefs to interact with each other is extremely diﬀicult (31).
Instead, Allamong et al. built a social media research platform
PNAS 2024 Vol. 121 No. 21 e2314021121 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2314021121 3 of 10
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 111.203.137.70 on October 5, 2025 from IP address 111.203.137.70.


===== PAGE 4 =====
where respondents were recruited to interact with LLMs that
were prompted to impersonate members of the opposing
political party for ten minutes. Though respondents were
told they might interact with automated accounts during the
study’s informed consent dialog, most participants expressed
uncertainty about whether they interacted with humans or
bots. These findings are preliminary due to the study’s small
sample size, but the research design indicates LLMs may be
useful for conducting research on group-level processes pro-
vided researchers carefully monitor human–AI interactions
for hallucinations or abuse in real time.
Can Generative AI Improve Simulation-Based Research? Re-
cent studies indicate generative AI tools may also be useful
for simulating large human populations in and of themselves.
This may enrich the “agent-based modeling” (ABM) paradigm,
in which researchers create synthetic societies to study
social processes (32–34). This decades-old tradition requires
researchers to create a facsimile of a social setting (such
as a social network, neighborhood, or marketplace) using
computer code. Researchers also create agents who interact
with each other in such settings according to a set of rules
proscribed by theories of human behavior (35). For example,
a researcher may assign an agent membership in one of two
identity groups and then simulate a contest for control of
territory between them. The agents in such a model can
be assigned behaviors such as maximizing their own self-
interest (or that of a group to which they belong), and these
parameters can be systematically varied in order to identify
the range of possible outcomes within the broader social
setting.
A key strength of agent-based models is that they allow
researchers to explore hypothetical scenarios and identify
individual-level patterns (such as in-group bias) that can
create macrolevel patterns (e.g., residential segregation).
Early ABMs employed agents who followed simplistic rules
such as moving to new neighborhoods if people from an
outgroup move into their neighborhood (34). Recent work
employs more sophisticated agents that can have many
characteristics—and follow multiple rules using human-
like decision-making processes (e.g., bounded rationality)
(32, 36, 37). Yet ABMs are often criticized for failing to capture
the full spectrum of human behaviors (38). For example,
conventional agents within ABMs do not use language,
interpret social contexts, or engage in conversations with
each other (39).
Recent studies indicate LLMs may be used to address
some of the limitations of simulation-based research. Park
et al. created a simulacrum where several dozen agents—
independently powered by multiple instances of GPT 3.5-
turbo—interacted with each other in a fictitious small-town
setting (6). The researchers gave the agents personalities and
traits (e.g., “a pharmacist who is gregarious”), and developed a
software infrastructure which allowed agents to have mem-
ories that summarized past interactions with other agents.
These agents not only developed daily routines as the simu-
lation progressed (e.g., waking up and eating breakfast), but
also demonstrated emergent group properties. For example,
one agent announced she was having a party, and the other
agents began to discuss whether they would attend. One of
the agents even asked one of the others out on a date to
attend this event, and others engaged in gossip about this
burgeoning romantic relationship. Though this study created
a relatively simplistic social environment with a small number
of agents, it provides a proof of concept that Generative AI
has the potential to advance social simulation research.
More recent studies indicate LLMs can be integrated
within ABMs to develop or test more sophisticated theories
of human behavior. For example, Törnberg et al. create a
simulated social media platform with five hundred agents
whose behaviors are calibrated using data from the Amer-
ican National Election Study (ANES) (39). The agents are
prompted to read news stories and make posts—or like
content—according to information about the social media
habits and political opinions of ANES respondents. This study
both reproduces known dynamics on social media platforms
and simulates what might happen if they used alternative
newsfeed algorithms that optimize for consensus, instead
of user engagement. Similarly, Gao et al. use real-world
social media data to calibrate a model they claim successfully
predicts the spread of information and emotions about
gender discrimination and nuclear energy (40). Another study
indicates LLMs can reproduce social movement dynamics on
social media (41).
Because most LLMs are probably trained with large
amounts of social media data, reproducing known human
dynamics within such platforms may represent a lower bound
for evaluating the prospect of these tools to improve ABMs
more broadly. Yet some recent studies indicate LLMs can
recreate competitive dynamics within simulated economic
and labor markets (42, 43), the diﬀusion of information and
decision-making within organizations, and crisis response
(41, 44, 45). Finally, there have been several recent eﬀorts
to generate software frameworks for agent-based modeling
that could reduce the entry-costs for social scientists who
hope to further expand this research design to even more
research questions (46, 47).
At the same time integrating LLMs within ABMs may
reinvigorate preexisting debates about the latter. Scholars
often debate whether increasing the complexity of agents is
desirable if emergent group dynamics of interest can be cre-
ated with parsimonious models (33). It is likewise unclear how
the performance of LLMs within ABMs should be evaluated.
Is it suﬀicient for LLMs to reproduce known group dynamics
within ABMS? Or, should they be assessed based upon their
capacity to predict real-world outcomes (37)? Would we have
more confidence in results generated by LLMs if they could
be confirmed by multiple models (48)? If so, the probabilistic
nature of LLMs may complicate scholars’ ability to reproduce
each other’s findings, as I discuss in additional detail below.
Future studies are also needed to identify whether LLMs
make ABMs more sensitive to stochasticity—or if they provide
more realistic representations of the unpredictable nature of
so much human behavior.
If such issues can be addressed, integrating LLMs and
ABMs could open new lines of inquiry. This approach could
be employed to study topics that are very diﬀicult to examine
in real life (such as violent extremism on social media), or to
study populations that are very diﬀicult to access (e.g., violent
extremists) (12). Simulations might also inform what little
observational research we have on these topics—and could
be calibrated using these observational data as well. Emer-
gent group behaviors identified through simulation research
could further inform observational data collection in turn—
or, potentially—social interventions designed to prevent such
behavior. Far more research is needed to determine whether
LLM-based simulations are realistic enough to be useful in
such endeavors—especially since many populations that are
4 of 10 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2314021121 pnas.org
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 111.203.137.70 on October 5, 2025 from IP address 111.203.137.70.


===== PAGE 5 =====
diﬀicult to study may not be well represented in the training
data used to create Generative AI.
Can Generative AI Improve Text Analysis? Regardless of
whether Generative AI can eﬀectively simulate human be-
havior, it may also help social scientists with other com-
mon research tasks such as content analysis of text-based
data. Wu et al. demonstrate GPT-3.5 can produce accurate
classifications of the ideology of U.S. elected oﬀicials by
analyzing their public statements (49). They passed the names
of random pairs of elected oﬀicials to the model and asked
it to identify which of the two was “more conservative” or
“more liberal.” The results closely approximate the popular
DW-Nominate method for measuring the ideology of elected
oﬀicials using roll-call voting, but also identified more nuance
within moderates who often vote against the extreme wings
of their parties. Similarly, Yang and Menczer argue GPT-3.5
can accurately code the credibility of media sources (50).
Gilardi et al. argue GPT 3.5-turbo can accurately measure the
topic of tweets, the stance or opinions of their authors, and
the “frames” used to organize the message in a narrative man-
ner (51). In addition to passing GPT 3.5-turbo the full text of
tweets, these researchers also fed the coding instructions that
would typically be assigned to human coders as a prompt to
the model. They find this model performs better than human
workers trained with such materials on Amazon Mechanical
Turk—though such coders are known to be less accurate than
those trained directly by researchers in small group settings.
Mellon et al., however, compared the coding performance of
several prominent LLMs to highly trained coders who were
instructed to analyze statements about British Elections (52).
They find LLMs produced the same classification roughly 95%
of the time. Argyle et al. also demonstrate that LLMs have
considerable potential for coding the topic of unstructured
conversations between multiple people using a mobile chat
platform (53).
Ziems et al. oﬀer perhaps the most systematic analysis
of the capabilities of LLMs for coding texts to date (54).
Using datasets coded by experts from sociology, political
science, and psychology—as well as nonsocial science fields
such as history, literature, and linguistics—they compare
the capabilities of LLMs to reproduce the work of human
expert annotators. Overall, they find LLMs perform well—
particularly in coding data created by political scientists
and sociologists. Unsurprisingly, they find the latest models
perform best. LLMs appear to assign more accurate codes
for some topics than others, however, which may be an
artifact of the way they were trained. That such models can
reproduce coding decisions of humans without any specific
training is encouraging, but Ziems et al. argue usage of LLMs
will still require some degree of human supervision, and
familiarity with task-specific prompt-engineering. Usefully,
these authors also present a reproducible data analysis
pipeline for ongoing evaluation of future models and other
datasets. Social scientists have also begun to identify best
practices for coding tasks with LLMs. For example, Törnberg
provides a practical guide for how to set up coding workflows
using APIs, and provides detailed recommendations about
how to write prompts for social science coding tasks (55).
The studies reviewed above indicate text analysis may
be among the most promising ways Generative AI might
improve social science research. That LLMs cannot yet match
the accuracy of expert human coders means that they will
not soon displace conventional text analysis. But human
coders are also prone to a variety of well-documented errors
that range from subjective bias to inconsistency and lack
of attention—particularly when researchers organize small
teams to code documents in a coordinated fashion. LLMs
can also exert bias and be inconsistent, as I discuss in
further detail below. But LLMs may enable social scientists
to examine corpora of unprecedented size with unforeseen
speed. Rather than taking a random sample of documents,
for example, social scientists now have the potential to code
an entire corpus in short order. LLMs also appear capable
of performing coding tasks in many of the world’s most
prominent languages as well as other rudimentary tasks
typically assigned to human research assistants such as data
coding or data entry (as discussed in greater detail in SI
Appendix) (56). More studies are needed to evaluate the
promise of LLMs for text analysis—and to evaluate possible
privacy issues discussed in additional detail below. But for
now, they appear poised to have a significant impact upon
the range of questions social scientists can ask with text-
based data. Multimodal models that can translate content
from images into text suggest these coding capabilities may
soon apply to other mediums as well.
Limitations and Possible Dangers
I have presented an optimistic view of the potential for
Generative AI to improve social science thus far. But these
tools have well-documented limitations that could negatively
impact social science research. In the following sections, I
discuss these limitations in detail.
Generative AI Exhibits Human Biases. Most AI tools are trained
using data created by humans, and frequently exhibit a broad
range of prejudice and cognitive errors accordingly (1, 57–60).
Generative AI has heightened concerns about bias, because
these tools are trained on large amounts of data created
by humans on the internet—where intergroup prejudice is
pervasive. One way to assess the scale and direction of bias
in Generative AI is to ask LLMs to complete public opinion
surveys. Santurkar et al. asked a series of LLMs trained by
OpenAI and A121 Labs to respond to questions within a
large group of surveys administered within the United States
(15). They compared how the models responded to questions
about abortion, gun control, and a range of other topics. They
find most LLM’s responses are more liberal than the general
population, and reflect those who are younger and have
more education. LLMs are particularly unlikely to perform
the responses of those over sixty-five years old, those who
are widowed, or those who identify as Mormon. Other
researchers have shown that LLMs tend to exhibit bias against
women and racial minorities (59, 61). LLMs also appear to
have distinctive personality characteristics—specifically, they
are more likely to be extroverted and agreeable than neurotic
(62). This may be due to the fact that many LLMs are created
with customer service applications in mind.
Santurkar et al. show that bias within LLMs can be partially
addressed using prompt engineering—for example, asking
the model to perform the role of a specific group (e.g., a
wealthy Republican from Texas) (15). This mirrors earlier
research which suggests removing bias from AI tools may
be easier than removing it from human populations (63).
However, such strategies depend critically upon the capacity
of researchers to identify bias in the first place. This is no
easy task when the processes used to train the most popular
PNAS 2024 Vol. 121 No. 21 e2314021121 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2314021121 5 of 10
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 111.203.137.70 on October 5, 2025 from IP address 111.203.137.70.


===== PAGE 6 =====
Generative AI models—such as GPT-4—are largely unknown.
Without access to the types of training data fed into such
models, researchers can only examine “known unknowns.” If
poor elderly people in rural areas are unable to voice their
collective concern about how Generative AI represents them,
for example, researchers may be unlikely to identify such bias.
A key question for social scientists is whether the bias of
Generative AI is a “bug” or a “feature” for research purposes.
We often design experiments that examine the impact of
bias on attitudes or behaviors. If bias in Generative AI tools
can be carefully controlled—a major assumption—it could
allow researchers to study its impact in empirical settings
(for example, a survey respondent evaluating a hypothetical
applicant for a job). It is further possible that Generative AI
might be useful in “reverse engineering” some types of bias.
Running experiments on the pronouns produced in response
to a broad range of prompts, for example, has the potential
to identify new types of gender discrimination—particularly
within the online settings that produce the training data for
Generative AI tools (61). On the other hand, the inability of
Generative AI tools to perform accurate representations of
people from marginalized groups could hinder social science
research. Those who hope LLMs might help researchers
assess the impact of their interventions among more diverse
populations might be disappointed by the quality of such
impersonations because of insuﬀicient training data.
But there is yet another challenge: one of the most
important stages in training a Generative AI model is when
its developers provide it with feedback through “fine-tuning”
or “reinforcement learning with human feedback.” AI compa-
nies usually attempt to train their models to avoid making
racist statements, for example. This process typically occurs
behind closed doors via “red team” attacks designed to goad
the model into producing prejudiced, dangerous, or illegal
content. Developers then create workflows to prevent the
models from discussing such content. Though such guard-
rails probably improve the safety of Generative AI tools for
public use, they may impede the ability of social scientists
to leverage bias for research purposes (12). Researchers who
want to use LLMs to impersonate biased groups, for example,
may discover these tools are unwilling to perform such roles
because they have been fine-tuned according to the norma-
tive preferences of highly educated liberals who may have
more concern about the protection of marginalized groups
than others (12, 64). To the extent that most proprietary LLMs
are trained to be helpful chat assistants, they may also diﬀer
from typical human populations in other diﬀicult-to-detect
ways. One study, for example, suggests LLMs exhibit more
rational behavior than humans (65). But there is also some
evidence that the opposite problem may exist: fine-tuning
LLMs to pass the Turing Test may make them more likely to
share inaccurate information (66).
Will Generative AI create “Junk Science”? The potential
for malicious actors to use Generative AI to spread
misinformation in the short term is very concerning because
tools such as LLMs are so adept at impersonating humans
at scale (67). But the capacity of Generative AI to produce
inaccurate information with confidence may also create
insidious problems in the long term. As the internet becomes
increasingly flooded with biased or inaccurate texts and
images generated by AI, what will prevent future models from
training themselves on these same flawed data? A recent ex-
ample of how such a scenario might unfold is Stack Overflow,
a popular “question and answer” website that software
developers use to help each other write code. As enthusiasm
about the capacity of Generative AI to write code peaked,
some users created bots that automatically passed people’s
questions about software to LLMs. Though many of the
answers produced by the LLM were high quality, others were
completely incorrect. The website quickly announced a new
policy banning LLMs to prevent a situation where users would
struggle to distinguish the good information from the bad.
Researchers who rely upon LLMs to perform literature re-
views, generate new research questions, or summarize large
corpora they are unable to read may face similar problems.
Journals and funding agencies may find themselves over-
whelmed by low-quality “junk-science” created by LLMs. Com-
puter scientists have begun to create digital “watermarks”
that flag AI-generated content. Watermarks are already being
used in Generative AI models that create images, but they
are somewhat more diﬀicult to implement within LLMs. One
proposal is to create an “accent” for LLMs—giving them a list
of words they should use whenever possible—to allow people
to retrospectively identify content that was not generated
by humans (68). But even this proposal will be diﬀicult to
implement at scale. Each entity that develops LLMs will not
only have to agree to use watermarks, but they will also need
to coordinate with each other. Large companies might be
encouraged to do this through government regulation. But
such coordination would be unable to detect LLMs created
by individuals skilled enough to develop smaller models on
their own.
Is Research with Generative AI Ethical? Among the most
pressing questions for social scientists is whether research
with Generative AI is ethical (69). This question is particularly
important since many Generative AI tools exhibit biases
that are not only oﬀensive (e.g., racism or misogyny), but
may also hallucinate inaccurate information that could be
shared by research participants on social media platforms, or
elsewhere. While these questions may be less important for
social scientists using Generative AI in a carefully supervised
manner—for example, using DALL-E to generate a picture
of a person that might be used in a survey experiment—
they take on added importance in situations where human
research participants might have conversations with a LLM
in an unsupervised manner. On the other hand, studies that
require humans to interact with each other also risk exposing
research participants to oﬀensive language, misinformation,
or abuse. Indeed, one might argue that the risks of such
behavior with real human populations might be greater than
research that deploys carefully prompted Generative AI in
interactive settings.
Another important question is whether researchers must
always obtain informed consent before exposing study
participants to Generative AI. This practice appears critical
for any study where a respondent could be exposed to
misinformation or abusive language generated by LLMs. Yet
disclosing the role of Generative AI in research also decreases
its scientific utility for simulating human behavior. This is
because disclosing the existence of Generative AI within a
research context would make it diﬀicult for researchers to
know whether study participants’ attitudes and behaviors are
shaped by their experiences interacting with synthetic agents,
or their attitudes toward AI more broadly (5).
One solution to this problem may be to design studies in
which research participants are informed they may interact
with AI during a study, but employ a mix of human and AI
agents within interactive settings. Even this strategy, though,
6 of 10 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2314021121 pnas.org
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 111.203.137.70 on October 5, 2025 from IP address 111.203.137.70.


===== PAGE 7 =====
creates the risk that an AI agent could encourage conflict
between human participants. Some of these risks might be
mitigated via content moderation filters that are currently
available for some LLMs—and through rigorous testing of
the prompts used to guide LLMs in research settings. Yet
given the probabilistic nature of these models—and the ever-
changing ways abuse and harassment can occur in online
settings—such strategies will require great care.
Another strategy is to design studies where Generative AI
acts as a mediator between human participants. For example,
Argyle et al. recruited a large group of Americans with
opposing views about gun regulation to participate in a peer-
to-peer chat on an online forum (53). In the experimental
condition, one person in each pair was shown a rephrasing
of a message they were about to send to their partner cre-
ated by GPT-3. These rephrasings employed evidence-based
insights from social science about how to make conversations
about divisive issues less polarizing (e.g., active listening).
The researchers found this intervention made conversations
about gun control more productive and less stressful for
those whose partner used recommendations from GPT-3.
This intervention does not require deception since human
impersonation is not necessary to evaluate the research
question. Furthermore, the researchers did not force human
participants to accept the rephrasings proposed by GPT-3;
rather, they were allowed to choose from several of them,
edit their original message, or reject all of them.
A final strategy might be to use Generative AI to try to
diagnose possible ethical issues. Earlier I mentioned that
researchers demonstrated that GPT-3 could perform the
responses characteristic of participants in the infamous
Milgram experiment. In this study, research participants were
asked to administer a lethal shock to another participant
whom they could not see. Milgram showed that many respon-
dents were willing to do so out of deference to authority, but
the study was widely criticized for creating trauma among
participants. If a similar experiment were attempted today
about an issue that is not yet widely viewed as unethical,
could GPT-3 be used to simulate outcomes before the study
is launched with human participants? If so, could such simula-
tions help researchers evaluate the likelihood of ethical issues
ante facto? Because LLMs are trained using retrospective
data, they may be of limited utility in predicting ethical issues
on the horizon, but they may nevertheless help researchers
learn from each other’s mistakes. Similarly, these tools might
be useful for detecting plagiarism or data fabrication as well.
Though Generative AI might help us solve some ethical
problems—such as using simulations to study dangerous
social interventions—it also raises new concerns about pri-
vacy and confidentiality. If a researcher uses GPT-4 to code a
series of in-depth interviews about a sensitive topic such as
intimate partner violence, the full-text of these interviews may
be logged inside private corporations that are not beholden
to the same standards for protecting human subjects as uni-
versity researchers. Even worse, such data could potentially
be sold to other corporations.
A final ethical concern is the impact of Generative AI
on climate change. A 2019 study indicates training a single
LLM may generate as much carbon dioxide as the lifetime
emission of five automobiles (70). Since the size of Generative
AI models has grown considerably since 2019, social scientists
must carefully reflect upon the presumably much larger
environmental costs of developing such technologies—even
if recent engineering advances have made training processes
more eﬀicient. The cost of training models must also be
weighed against the eﬀiciencies they create, however. One
study, for example, suggests the carbon emissions of writing
and illustrating are lower for AI than for humans (71).
Is Research with Generative AI Replicable? A key pillar of the
open-science movement is that researchers should design
studies that can be replicated by others. Though Generative
AI may help researchers increase the external validity of
their research designs, this may come at the cost of internal
validity—or the capacity of diﬀerent groups of researchers
to reproduce or replicate each other’s results (2, 12). As I
mentioned at the outset of this article, many of the studies
discussed above are preprints that have not yet been peer-
reviewed, much less replicated. Determining how many of
these studies will replicate several years from now should
therefore be a central concern of anyone evaluating the
promise of Generative AI for social science.
There are several reasons why research with Generative
AI is diﬀicult to replicate. First, these models are probabilistic
in nature. Even a single researcher using identical prompts
in a successive manner should expect a LLM to produce
diﬀerent responses. The tendency for LLMs to produce het-
erogeneous results can be partly controlled via “temperature”
parameters that regulate the predictability of model output.
At present, however, there are no standards for what values
of this parameter are appropriate (72). Lower values might
produce more dependable results, but a researcher who
employs LLMs to interact with humans in a field experiment
may not want them to become overly repetitive. Studies
indicate subtle diﬀerences in the wording of prompts can
also produce very diﬀerent output within the same LLM (13).
Fortunately, researchers are making progress identifying the
sensitivity of prompt variations via automated processes that
perturb text or vary the amount of context provided (73).
But best practices for such sensitivity analyses have not yet
been identified in social science—or any other field—to my
knowledge.
Most LLMs also produce diﬀerent results over time. This
is because many of them are constantly being fine-tuned
to make them more eﬀective or create new safeguards
against bias or illicit behavior. This may create “drift” within
LLMs, wherein improving model performance in one area
might change the outputs they produce in another domain
(74). Finally, social scientists must consider broader forms of
temporal validity (13, 75). As LLMs evolve in response to user
behavior in diﬀerent ways—as well as ongoing events in the
world—this will create another significant challenge for those
who strive for reproducible research with Generative AI.
In addition to assessing the reproducibility of findings
within the same model, social scientists should also consider
the stability of results across multiple models. There is
already some evidence that diﬀerent models will produce
substantially diﬀerent results. Ziems et al., for example,
report substantial diﬀerences in the ability of ChatGPT and
Google’s FLAN model to reproduce expert coding of qual-
itative documents across a range of social science fields
(54). Similarly, Santurkar et al. report substantial diﬀerences
in the capacity of diﬀerent LLMs to accurately represent
demographic groups across surveys (15). The source of such
discrepancies across models is very diﬀicult to explain since
the processes used to train and fine-tune large proprietary
models are so opaque. At the very least, however, scholars
should clearly report which versions of LLMs they use, and
precisely when they performed the analysis.
PNAS 2024 Vol. 121 No. 21 e2314021121 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2314021121 7 of 10
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 111.203.137.70 on October 5, 2025 from IP address 111.203.137.70.


===== PAGE 8 =====
Creating Open-Source Infrastructure for Social
Science Research
As the sections above describe, Generative AI has many
limitations for social science research—most of which we are
only beginning to understand. How can social scientists work
together to minimize the risks of research with Generative
AI without sacrificing the many opportunities it creates?
Accomplishing this agenda will require deeper understanding
of how Generative AI tools are built and fine-tuned. Yet such
information about GPT-4 and other leading proprietary mod-
els remain closely guarded industry secrets. Indeed, OpenAI
has not even disclosed even the most basic information about
GPT-4—such as its size, or number of parameters.
If social scientists become reliant upon proprietary mod-
els, we also risk tying our endeavors to the vicissitudes of
corporate interests (2). For the time being, both Meta and
Google have made two of their models available to the public:
Llama and Gemma. These models are well documented
and released alongside scientific papers that can help social
scientists evaluate their potential. Meta has even released
detailed information about the inner workings of the model
such as the numeric weights its uses to respond to prompts.
This enables researchers to better control the fine-tuning
process, and study how LLMs work. Yet Meta recently stopped
providing information about the datasets used to train Llama,
and does not provide licenses without restriction, as is
customary with open-source software. This may portend
challenges on the horizon. There is no guarantee that Meta
will suddenly restrict access to its Generative AI tools, or begin
charging researchers to access it like their peers. Though
researchers at wealthy institutions may be able to aﬀord such
fees, many others may not—reproducing inequality within
the academic caste system (76).
There is precedent for concern about technology com-
panies transitioning from generous data-sharing models to
those that are highly restrictive. The example of social media
companies is instructive. In the early 2010s, many compa-
nies shared generous amounts of data with researchers.
This enabled entirely new forms of scholarly research, and
social scientists and researchers inside industry frequently
collaborated with each other and presented their work at
conferences. In more recent years, data-sharing practices at
most large social media companies have been discontinued
(77). The Academic Developer Program at Twitter that I helped
create once allowed social scientists to collect vast amount
of data. Access to much smaller amounts of data is now
prohibitively expensive for most researchers.
One alternative would be for social scientists to develop
their own, open-source Generative AI models (2). Such an ef-
fort could build upon the recent proliferation of open-source
Generative AI tools catalogued by Hugging Face. In addition
to being free to use, most open-source models provide more
transparency than their proprietary counterparts. This not
only allows researchers to better understand the processes
used to train and fine-tune Generative AI, but it could also
allow them to control such processes altogether. Some newer
models created by Mistral even oﬀer model weights that are
“raw,” or not fine-tuned. Social scientists could build similar
models to better control when and how models become
biased—especially in research settings where the values built
into models by large corporations may inhibit research. Social
scientists could also work together to create training data
for Generative AI tools, which would allow us to exert even
further control over their behavior. Open-source models also
have privacy benefits. Prompts used by researchers could
be carefully protected, instead of being potentially resold to
third-parties or used to develop future models (72).
Open-source models also often create and sustain a
community of people with shared concerns. Rather than
guessing when and how proprietary models may exhibit
bias—or endlessly testing diﬀerent prompts to achieve re-
search goals—social scientists could work together to identify
the limitations of Generative AI tools for social science
research. Transparent, public discussion about Generative
AI may also help researchers evaluate some of the other
risks above—such as the dissemination of misinformation.
Social scientists could also design open-source Generative AI
tools to maximize the chances that research can be replicated
by running experiments designed to test whether certain
training and fine-tuning processes enable scholars to more
easily reproduce each other’s work.
Another reason for social scientists to consider building
their own infrastructure is that the quality and performance
of open-source Generative AI tools has increased markedly
in recent months. Though benchmarks for evaluating the
performance of LLMs are hotly debated, it is noteworthy that
Llama 3 and R Command + and other freely available models
are beginning to approach the performance of proprietary
models in many areas. More importantly, two recent analyses
suggest open-source models perform well at some of the
types of social science applications described above, such as
coding unstructured text. One study indicates open-source
models perform better than crowd-workers at annotating
news articles and tweets—even though they perform slightly
less well than ChatGPT on these tasks (72). Another indicates
the open-source model FLAN outperforms proprietary mod-
els on a number of text-coding tasks, compared to ground-
truth labels created by human experts (54).
On the other hand, open-source models may create a
range of new risks. Many worry that publicly releasing model
weights—or the process used to train LLMs—will empower
malicious actors to build custom LLMs to spread misin-
formation on social media, conduct personalized phishing
campaigns, create nonconsensual pornography, or access
dangerous information about biotechnology and weapons.
Yet multiple groups of leading scholars and policy experts
argue such risks are marginal when compared to information
that is already readily available on the internet (78, 79).
Nevertheless, a suite of open-source tools for research on
social science would require careful leadership from a diverse
group of scholars, familiar with the risks and advantages of
Generative AI. This council could be charged with determining
what components of the model and training process should
be publicly released—and whether access to some of this
information should be restricted to protect against abuse. A
council could also weigh the benefits of building large models
against the environmental costs related to the amount of
electricity currently required to train and power them. Such
an eﬀort would require a broader organization to implement
the decisions of the Council, and thus considerable financial
resources. It would require administrators and other staﬀ
responsible for controlling access to the model and creating
the infrastructure necessary for scholars to use it (e.g., APIs
and cloud services). It would also require technical staﬀ to
develop and maintain the tools. If such an organization could
be realized, however, it would not only improve access to
state-of-the-art technology among a broad group of scholars,
but also improve our capacity to build disciplinary standards
of open science and ethics into research with Generative AI.
8 of 10 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2314021121 pnas.org
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 111.203.137.70 on October 5, 2025 from IP address 111.203.137.70.


===== PAGE 9 =====
Such an organization could also explore broader common
goods, such as the creation of a large silicon sample of human
populations that researchers can use to conduct preliminary
tests of human subjects, or an open-source codebase for
integrating LLMs into agent-based models.
Conclusion
Few technologies have created so much excitement—and
so much concern—as Generative AI. Hype cycle dynamics
indicate expectations for these tools may soon reach their
peak, and crash down rapidly as users become more famil-
iar with their limitations (80). I expect social scientists will
continue to play a key role in identifying those pitfalls given
their extensive experience studying subjects such as bias and
misinformation. But I also hope that social scientists will not
become so preoccupied by the limitations of Generative AI
that we do not fully evaluate its promise. For every new
problem these tools create, they also hold the potential to
solve many others. If the capabilities of these tools continue
to expand at a fraction of their current pace, Generative AI
may become a fixture within the social scientist’s toolkit much
sooner than many researchers realize.
Above all, I encourage social scientists not to think of
themselves as mere “end-users” of Generative AI. I predict
the future of AI research will require training models to better
understand the science of social relationships—for example,
how an AI agent should interact in group settings where the
goal is not simply to provide utility for a single user, but
to navigate the more complex challenges associated with
emergent group behaviors. If I am correct, social scientists
may soon find themselves at the center of eﬀorts to “reverse
engineer” what the sociologist William H. Sewell Jr. calls
the “social sense.” That is, the ability for Generative AI to
detect and navigate the taken-for-granted social norms and
expectations that guide so much human behavior—especially
those that are rarely captured by our pens (or keyboards).
This will require a much more sophisticated understanding
of how the behavior of individual agents is constrained by
social networks, institutions, organizations, and other extra-
individual factors that are cornerstones of the science of
human behavior.
Data, Materials, and Software Availability. All study data are included
in the article and/or SI Appendix.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS. For helpful comments on previous versions of this
manuscript, I am grateful to the Editor, three anonymous reviewers, Lisa Argyle,
Tyson Brown, Petter Törnberg, Sunshine Hillygus, Isaac Mehlhaff, Patrick Park,
Lynn Smith-Lovin, and Jessi Streib.
1. K. Sayash, A. Narayanan, AI Snake Oil (Princeton University Press, 2024).
2. A. Spirling, Why open-source generative AI models are an ethical way forward for science. Nature 616, 413 (2023).
3. A. Vaswani et al., Attention is all you need. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1706.03762 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
4. M. Mitchell, D. C. Krakauer, The debate over understanding in AI’s large language models. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120, e2215907120 (2023).
5. M. Jakesch, J. T. Hancock, M. Naaman, Human heuristics for AI-generated language are ﬂawed. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120, e2208839120 (2023).
6. J. S. Park et al., Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.03442 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
7. S. Kreps, R. M. McCain, M. Brundage, All the news that’s ﬁt to fabricate: AI-generated text as a tool of media misinformation. J. Exp. Polit. Sci. 9, 104–117 (2022).
8. J. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Q. Luo, A. Parker, M. Choudhury, “Synthetic lies: Understanding AI-generated misinformation and evaluating algorithmic and human solutions” in CHI ’23: Proceedings of the 2023 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 2023).
9. L. D. Grifﬁn et al., Susceptibility to inﬂuence of large language models. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.06074 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
10. E. Karinshak, S. X. Liu, J. S. Park, J. T. Hancock, Working with AI to persuade. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 7, 116:1–116:29 (2023).
11. L. P. Argyle et al., Out of one, many: Using language models to simulate human samples. Polit. Anal. 31, 337–351 (2023).
12. I. Grossmann et al., AI and the transformation of social science research. Science 380, 1108–1109 (2023).
13. J. Bisbee, J. Clinton, C. Dorff, B. Kenkel, J. Larson, Synthetic replacements for human survey data? the perils of large language models. socArXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.31235/osf.io/5ecfa (Accessed
20 December 2023).
14. V. Dentella, F. Günther, E. Leivada, Systematic testing of three language models. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120, e2309583120 (2023).
15. S. Santurkar et al., Whose opinions do language models reﬂect? arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.17548 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
16. V. Veselovsky et al., Prevalence and prevention of large language model use in crowd work. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.15683 (Accessed 19 December 2023).
17. J. Kim, B. Lee, AI-augmented surveys: Leveraging large language models for opinion prediction in nationally representative surveys. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.09620 (Accessed
20 December 2023).
18. F. M. Götz, R. Maertens, S. Loomba, S. van der Linden, Let the algorithm speak. Psychol. Methods, 10.1037/met0000540 (2023).
19. J. J. Horton, Large language models as simulated economic agents: What can we learn from homo silicus? arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.07543 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
20. G. Aher, R. I. Arriaga, A. T. Kalai, Using large language models to simulate multiple humans and replicate human subject studies. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2208.10264 (Accessed 20
December 2023).
21. M. Binz, E. Schulz, Using cognitive psychology to understand GPT-3. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120, e2218523120 (2023).
22. D. Dillion, N. Tandon, Y. Gu, K. Gray, Can AI language models replace human participants? Trends Cognit. Sci. 27, 597–600 (2023).
23. Q. Mei, Y. Xie, W. Yuan, M. O. Jackson, A turing test of whether AI chatbots are behaviorally similar to humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 121, e2313925121 (2024).
24. C. Xie et al., Can large language model agents simulate human trust behaviors? arXiv [Preprint] (2024). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.04559 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
25. A. Ashokkumar, L. Hewitt, I. Ghezae, R. Willer, Prediction of social science experimental results using large language models (Working Paper, 2024).
26. A. Bakhtin et al., Human-level play in the game of Diplomacy by combining language models with strategic reasoning. Science 378, 1067–1074 (2022).
27. O. Vinyals et al., Grandmaster level in StarCraft II using multi-agent reinforcement learning. Nature 575, 350–354 (2019).
28. F. Dell’Acqua, B. Kogut, P. Perkowski, Super Mario Meets AI: Experimental effects of automation and skills on team performance and coordination (SSRN Scholarly Paper, 2020).
29. M. L. Traeger, S. Strohkorb Sebo, M. Jung, B. Scassellati, N. A. Christakis, Vulnerable robots positively shape human conversational dynamics in a human–robot team. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 117, 6370–6375
(2020).
30. M. B. Allamong et al., Outnumbered online: An experiment on Partisan imbalance in a dynamic social media environment. OSF [Preprints] (2023). https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/tygec (Accessed 20 December
2023).
31. J. Becker, E. Porter, D. Centola, The wisdom of partisan crowds. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 116, 10717–10722 (2019).
32. R. Axelrod, The Complexity of Cooperation: Agent-Based Models of Competition and Collaboration (Princeton University Press, 1997).
33. J. M. Epstein, R. Axtell, Growing Artiﬁcial Societies: Social Science from the Bottom Up (Brookings Institution Press, 1996).
34. T. C. Schelling, Micromotives and Macrobehavior (WW Norton & Company, 1978).
35. M. W. Macy, R. Willer, From factors to actors: Computational sociology and agent-based modeling. Annu. Rev. Sociol. 28, 143–166 (2002).
36. D. Byrne, G. Callaghan, Complexity Theory and the Social Sciences: The State of the Art (Routledge, 2022).
37. R. L. Axtell et al., Population growth and collapse in a multiagent model of the Kayenta Anasazi in Long House Valley. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 7275–7279 (2002).
38. R. Conte, M. Paolucci, On agent-based modeling and computational social science. Front. Psychol. 5, 668 (2014).
39. P. Törnberg, D. Valeeva, J. Uitermark, C. Bail, Simulating social media using large language models to evaluate alternative news feed algorithms. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2310.
05984 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
40. C. Gao et al., S3: Social-network simulation system with large language model-empowered agents. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.14984 (Accessed 19 December 2023).
41. X. Mou, Z. Wei, X. Huang, Unveiling the truth and facilitating change: Towards agent-based large-scale social movement simulation. arXiv [Preprint] (2024). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2402.16333 (Accessed
20 December 2023).
42. Q. Zhao et al., CompeteAI: Understanding the competition behaviors in large language model-based agents. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.17512 (Accessed 19 December 2023).
PNAS 2024 Vol. 121 No. 21 e2314021121 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2314021121 9 of 10
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 111.203.137.70 on October 5, 2025 from IP address 111.203.137.70.


===== PAGE 10 =====
43. Y. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Sun, Metaagents: Simulating interactions of human behaviors for LLM-based task-oriented coordination via collaborative generative agents. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.
06500 (Accessed 19 December 2023).
44. N. Ghaffarzadegan, A. Majumdar, R. Williams, N. Hosseinichimeh, Generative agent-based modeling: Unveiling social system dynamics through coupling mechanistic models with generative artiﬁcial
intelligence. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.11456 (Accessed 19 December 2023).
45. B. Xiao, Z. Yin, Z. Shan, Simulating public administration crisis: A novel generative agent-based simulation system to lower technology barriers in social science research. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://arxiv.org/
abs/2311.06957 (Accessed 19 December 2023).
46. A. S. Vezhnevets et al., Generative agent-based modeling with actions grounded in physical, social, or digital space using Concordia. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.03664 (Accessed 19
December 2023).
47. Z. Kaiya et al., Lyfe agents: Generative agents for low-cost real-time social interactions. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.02172 (Accessed 19 December 2023).
48. R. Axtell, R. Axelrod, J. M. Epstein, M. D. Cohen, Aligning simulation models: A case study and results. Comput. Math. Organ. Theory 1, 123–141 (1996).
49. P. Y. Wu, J. Nagler, J. A. Tucker, S. Messing, Large language models can be used to scale the ideologies of politicians in a zero-shot learning setting. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.
12057 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
50. K. C. Yang, F. Menczer, Large language models can rate news outlet credibility. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2304.00228 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
51. F. Gilardi, M. Alizadeh, M. Kubli, ChatGPT outperforms crowd workers for text-annotation tasks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120, e2305016120 (2023).
52. J. Mellon et al., Do AIs know what the most important issue is? Using language models to code open-text social survey responses at scale. Research & Politics, 10.1177/20531680241231468 (2024).
53. L. P. Argyle et al., Leveraging AI for democratic discourse: Chat interventions can improve online political conversations at scale. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120, e2311627120 (2023).
54. C. Ziems et al., Can large language models transform computational social science? arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2305.03514 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
55. P. Törnberg, How to use LLMs for text analysis. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.13106 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
56. A. Korinek, Language Models and Cognitive Automation for Economic Research (National Bureau of Economic Research, 2023).
57. R. Benjamin, Race After Technology: Abolitionist Tools for the New Jim Code (Polity, Cambridge, UK/Medford, MA, ed. 1, 2019).
58. S. Lazar, A. Nelson, AI safety on whose terms? Science 381, 138 (2023).
59. E. M. Bender, T. Gebru, A. McMillan-Major, S. Shmitchell, “On the dangers of stochastic parrots: Can language models be too big?” in Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and
Transparency (Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, 2021), pp. 610–623.
60. K. Yee, U. Tantipongpipat, S. Mishra, Image Cropping on Twitter. Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact. 5, 1–24 (2021).
61. W. I. Cho, J. W. Kim, S. M. Kim, N. S. Kim, “On measuring gender bias” in Proceedings of the First Workshop on Gender Bias in Natural Language Processing (2019).
62. M. Pellert, C. Lechner, C. Wagner, B. Rammstedt, M. Strohmaier, AI psychometrics: Assessing the psychological proﬁles of large language models through psychometric inventories. Perspect. Psychol. Sci.,
10.1177/17456916231214460 (2024).
63. Z. Obermeyer, B. Powers, C. Vogeli, S. Mullainathan, Dissecting racial bias in an algorithm used to manage the health of populations. Science 366, 447–453 (2019).
64. P. Schramowski, C. Turan, N. Andersen, C. A. Rothkopf, K. Kersting, Large pre-trained language models contain human-like biases of what is right and wrong to do. Nat. Mach. Intell. 4, 258–268 (2022).
65. Y. Chen, T. X. Liu, Y. Shan, S. Zhong, The emergence of economic rationality of GPT. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120, e2316205120 (2023).
66. D. Ippolito, D. Duckworth, C. Callison-Burch, D. Eck, Automatic detection of generated text is easiest when humans are fooled. arXiv [Preprint] (2020). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1911.00650 (Accessed 20
December 2023).
67. S. Feuerriegel et al., Research can help to tackle AI-generated disinformation. Nat. Hum. Behav. 7, 1818–1821 (2023).
68. J. Kirchenbauer et al., A watermark for large language models. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2301.10226 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
69. L. Weidinger et al., “Taxonomy of risks posed by language models” in Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (FAccT’22) (Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, 2022), pp. 214–229.
70. E. Strubell, A. Ganesh, A. McCallum, Energy and policy considerations for deep learning in NLP. arXiv [Preprint] (2019). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1906.02243 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
71. B. Tomlinson, R. W. Black, D. J. Patterson, A. W. Torrance, The carbon emissions of writing and illustrating are lower for AI than for humans. Sci. Rep. 14, 3732 (2024).
72. M. Alizadeh et al., Open-source large language models outperform crowd workers and approach ChatGPT in text-annotation tasks. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.02179 (Accessed 19 December
2023).
73. C. Si et al., Prompting GPT-3 to be reliable. arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2210.09150 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
74. L. Chen, M. Zaharia, J. Zou, How is ChatGPT’s behavior changing over time? arXiv [Preprint] (2023). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2307.09009 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
75. K. Munger, Temporal validity as meta-science. Res. Polit. 10, 1–10 (2023).
76. A. Clauset, S. Arbesman, D. B. Larremore, Systematic inequality and hierarchy in faculty hiring networks. Sci. Adv. 1, e1400005 (2015).
77. D. Freelon, Computational research in the post-API age. Polit. Commun. 35, 1–4 (2018).
78. R. Bommasani et al., Considerations for Governing Open Foundation Models. Issue Brief Human, Stanford HAI (Elsevier, 2023).
79. S. Kapoor et al., On the societal impact of open foundation models. arXiv [Preprint] (2024). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2403.07918 (Accessed 20 December 2023).
80. M. Salganik, Bit by Bit: Social Research in the Digital Age (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2018).
10 of 10 https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2314021121 pnas.org
Downloaded from https://www.pnas.org by 111.203.137.70 on October 5, 2025 from IP address 111.203.137.70.
