

===== PAGE 1 =====
Review
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-019-1138-y
Machine behaviour
 iyad Rahwan1,2,3,34*, Manuel Cebrian1,34, Nick Obradovich1,34, Josh Bongard4, Jean-François Bonnefon5, Cynthia Breazeal1,  
Jacob w. Crandall6, Nicholas A. Christakis7,8,9,10, iain D. Couzin11,12,13, Matthew O. Jackson14,15,16, Nicholas R. Jennings17,18,  
ece Kamar19, isabel M. Kloumann20, Hugo Larochelle21, David Lazer22,23,24, Richard Mcelreath25,26, Alan Mislove27,  
David C. Parkes28,29, Alex ‘Sandy’ Pentland1, Margaret e. Roberts30, Azim Shariff31, Joshua B. Tenenbaum32 & Michael wellman33
Machines powered by artificial intelligence increasingly mediate our social, cultural, economic and political interactions. 
Understanding the behaviour of artificial intelligence systems is essential to our ability to control their actions, reap 
their benefits and minimize their harms. Here we argue that this necessitates a broad scientific research agenda to study 
machine behaviour that incorporates and expands upon the discipline of computer science and includes insights from 
across the sciences. W e first outline a set of questions that are fundamental to this emerging field and then explore the 
technical, legal and institutional constraints on the study of machine behaviour.
i
n his landmark 1969 book Sciences of the Artificial1,  
Nobel Laureate Herbert Simon wrote: “Natural 
science is knowledge about natural objects and 
phenomena. We ask whether there cannot also be 
‘artificial’ science—knowledge about artificial objects 
and phenomena. ” In line with Simon’s vision, we describe the emergence 
of an interdisciplinary field of scientific study. This field is concerned 
with the scientific study of intelligent machines, not as engineering  
artefacts, but as a class of actors with particular behavioural patterns and 
ecology. This field overlaps with, but is distinct from, computer science 
and robotics. It treats machine behaviour empirically. This is akin to how 
ethology and behavioural ecology study animal behaviour by integrating 
physiology and biochemistry—intrinsic properties—with the study of 
ecology and evolution—properties shaped by the environment. Animal 
and human behaviours cannot be fully understood without the study of 
the contexts in which behaviours occur. Machine behaviour similarly 
cannot be fully understood without the integrated study of algorithms 
and the social environments in which algorithms operate2.
At present, the scientists who study the behaviours of these virtual 
and embodied artificial intelligence (AI) agents are predominantly the 
same scientists who have created the agents themselves (throughout we 
use the term ‘ AI agents’ liberally to refer to both complex and simple 
algorithms used to make decisions). As these scientists create agents to 
solve particular tasks, they often focus on ensuring the agents fulfil their 
intended function (although these respective fields are much broader than 
the specific examples listed here). For example, AI agents should meet a 
benchmark of accuracy in document classification, facial recognition or 
visual object detection. Autonomous cars must navigate successfully in a 
variety of weather conditions; game-playing agents must defeat a variety 
of human or machine opponents; and data-mining agents must learn 
which individuals to target in advertising campaigns 
on social media.
These AI agents have the potential to augment 
human welfare and well-being in many ways. Indeed, 
that is typically the vision of their creators. But a 
broader consideration of the behaviour of AI agents is now critical. AI 
agents will increasingly integrate into our society and are already involved 
in a variety of activities, such as credit scoring, algorithmic trading, local 
policing, parole decisions, driving, online dating and drone warfare3,4. 
Commentators and scholars from diverse fields—including, but not 
limited to, cognitive systems engineering, human computer interaction, 
human factors, science, technology and society, and safety engineering— 
are raising the alarm about the broad, unintended consequences of AI 
agents that can exhibit behaviours and produce downstream societal 
effects—both positive and negative—that are unanticipated by their 
creators5–8.
In addition to this lack of predictability surrounding the consequences 
of AI, there is a fear of the potential loss of human oversight over intel-
ligent machines5 and of the potential harms that are associated with the 
increasing use of machines for tasks that were once performed directly 
by humans9. At the same time, researchers describe the benefits that AI 
agents can offer society by supporting and augmenting human decision- 
making10,11. Although discussions of these issues have led to many important  
insights in many separate fields of academic inquiry12, with some high-
lighting safety challenges of autonomous systems13 and others studying 
the implications in fairness, accountability and transparency (for example, 
the ACM conference on fairness, accountability and transparency (https://
fatconference.org/)), many questions remain.
This Review frames and surveys the emerging interdisciplinary field 
of machine behaviour: the scientific study of behaviour exhibited by 
1Media Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. 2Institute for Data, Systems & Society, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA. 3Center for Humans 
and Machines, Max Planck Institute for Human Development, Berlin, Germany. 4Department of Computer Science, University of Vermont, Burlington, VT, USA. 5Toulouse School of Economics 
(TSM-R), CNRS, Université Toulouse Capitole, Toulouse, France. 6Computer Science Department, Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, USA. 7Department of Sociology, Yale University, New Haven, 
CT, USA. 8Department of Statistics and Data Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. 9Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. 10Yale Institute 
for Network Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. 11Department of Collective Behaviour, Max Planck Institute for Ornithology, Konstanz, Germany. 12Department of Biology, University of 
Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany. 13Centre for the Advanced Study of Collective Behaviour, University of Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany. 14Department of Economics, Stanford University, Stanford, 
CA, USA. 15Canadian Institute for Advanced Research, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. 16The Sante Fe Institute, Santa Fe, NM, USA. 17Department of Computing, Imperial College London, London, UK. 
18Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Imperial College London, London, UK. 19Microsoft Research, Redmond, WA, USA. 20Facebook AI, Facebook Inc, New York, NY, USA. 21Google 
Brain, Montreal, Québec, Canada. 22Department of Political Science, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. 23College of Computer & Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, 
USA. 24Institute for Quantitative Social Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. 25Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology, Leipzig, Germany. 26Department of Anthropology, 
University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA. 27College of Computer & Information Science, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA. 28School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard 
University, Cambridge, MA, USA. 29Harvard Data Science Initiative, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, USA. 30Department of Political Science, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, CA, 
USA. 31Department of Psychology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. 32Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge, MA, USA. 33Computer Science & Engineering, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 34These authors contributed equally: Iyad Rahwan, Manuel Cebrian, Nick Obradovich. 
*e-mail: irahwan@mit.edu
25 APR i L 2019 | v OL 568 | NATUR e  | 477

===== PAGE 2 =====
ReviewReSeARCH
intelligent machines. Here we outline the key research themes, questions 
and landmark research studies that exemplify this field. We start by pro-
viding background on the study of machine behaviour and the necessarily 
interdisciplinary nature of this science. We then provide a framework for 
the conceptualization of studies of machine behaviour. We close with a 
call for the scientific study of machine and human–machine ecologies 
and discuss some of the technical, legal and institutional barriers that are 
faced by researchers in this field.
Motivation for the study of machine behaviour
There are three primary motivations for the scientific discipline of 
machine behaviour. First, various kinds of algorithms operate in our 
society, and algorithms have an ever-increasing role in our daily activ-
ities. Second, because of the complex properties of these algorithms 
and the environments in which they operate, some of their attributes 
and behaviours can be difficult or impossible to formalize analytically. 
Third, because of their ubiquity and complexity, predicting the effects 
of intelligent algorithms on humanity—whether positive or negative—
poses a substantial challenge.
Ubiquity of algorithms
The current prevalence of diverse algorithms in society is unprece-
dented5 (Fig. 1). News-ranking algorithms and social media bots influ-
ence the information seen by citizens14–18. Credit-scoring algorithms 
determine loan decisions19–22. Online pricing algorithms shape the cost 
of products differentially across consumers23–25. Algorithmic trading 
software makes transactions in financial markets at rapid speed26–29. 
Algorithms shape the dispatch and spatial patterns of local policing30 
and programs for algorithmic sentencing affect time served in the 
penal system7. Autonomous cars traverse our cities31, and ride-sharing  
algorithms alter the travel patterns of conventional vehicles 32. 
Machines map our homes, respond to verbal commands33 and per-
form regular household tasks34. Algorithms shape romantic matches 
for online dating services35,36. Machines are likely to increasingly sub-
stitute for humans in the raising of our young37 and the care for our 
old38. Autonomous agents are increasingly likely to affect collective 
behaviours, from group-wide coordination to sharing39. Furthermore, 
although the prospect of developing autonomous weapons is highly 
controversial, with many in the field voicing their opposition6,40, if such 
weapons end up being deployed, then machines could determine who 
lives and who dies in armed conflicts41,42.
Complexity and opacity of algorithms
The extreme diversity of these AI systems, coupled with their ubiquity, 
would by itself ensure that studying the behaviour of such systems poses 
a formidable challenge, even if the individual algorithms themselves 
were relatively simple. The complexity of individual AI agents is cur-
rently high and rapidly increasing. Although the code for specifying the 
architecture and training of a model can be simple, the results can be 
very complex, oftentimes effectively resulting in ‘black boxes’43. They are 
given input and produce output, but the exact functional processes that 
generate these outputs are hard to interpret even to the very scientists 
who generate the algorithms themselves44, although some progress in 
interpretability is being made45,46. Furthermore, when systems learn from 
data, their failures are linked to imperfections in the data or how data 
was collected, which has led some to argue for adapted reporting mech-
anisms for datasets47 and models48. The dimensionality and size of data 
add another layer of complexity to understanding machine behaviour49.
Further complicating this challenge is the fact that much of the 
source code and model structure for the most frequently used algo-
rithms in society is proprietary, as are the data on which these systems 
are trained. Industrial secrecy and legal protection of intellectual prop-
erty often surround source code and model structure. In many settings, 
the only factors that are publicly observable about industrial AI systems 
are their inputs and outputs.
Even when available, the source code or model structure of an AI 
agent can provide insufficient predictive power over its output. AI 
agents can also demonstrate novel behaviours through their interac-
tion with the world and other agents that are impossible to predict 
with precision50. Even when the analytical solutions are mathematically 
describable, they can be so lengthy and complex as to be indeciphera-
ble51,52. Furthermore, when the environment is changing—perhaps as 
a result of the algorithm itself—anticipating and analysing behaviour 
is made much harder.
Algorithms’ beneficial and detrimental effect on humanity
The ubiquity of algorithms, coupled with their increasing complexity, 
tends to amplify the difficulty of estimating the effects of algorithms 
on individuals and society. AI agents can shape human behaviours and 
societal outcomes in both intended and unintended ways. For example, 
some AI agents are designed to aid learning outcomes for children53 
and others are designed to assist older people38,54. These AI systems 
may benefit their intended humans by nudging those humans into 
better learning or safer mobility behaviours. However, with the power 
to nudge human behaviours in positive or intended ways comes the 
risk that human behaviours may be nudged in costly or unintended 
ways—children could be influenced to buy certain branded products 
and elders could be nudged to watch certain television programs.
The way that such algorithmic influences on individual humans  
scale into society-wide effects, both positive and negative, is of critical 
concern. As an example, the exposure of a small number of individuals 
to political misinformation may have little effect on society as a whole. 
However, the effect of the insertion and propagation of such misin-
formation on social media may have more substantial societal conse-
quences55–57. Furthermore, issues of algorithmic fairness or bias58,59 
have been already documented in diverse contexts, including computer 
vision60, word embeddings61,62, advertising63, policing64, criminal jus-
tice7,65 and social services66. To address these issues, practitioners will 
sometimes be forced to make value trade-offs between competing and 
incompatible notions of bias58,59 or between human versus machine 
biases. Additional questions regarding the effect of algorithms remain, 
such as how online dating algorithms alter the societal institution of 
marriage35,36 and whether there are systemic effects of increasing inter-
action with intelligent algorithms on the stages and speed of human 
development53. These questions become more complex in ‘hybrid 
systems’ composed of many machines and humans interacting and 
manifesting collective behaviour39,67. For society to have input into and 
oversight of the downstream consequences of AI, scholars of machine 
behaviour must provide insights into how these systems work and the 
benefits, costs and trade-offs presented by the ubiquitous use of AI in 
society.
The interdisciplinary study of machine behaviour
To study machine behaviour—especially the behaviours of black box 
algorithms in real-world settings—we must integrate knowledge from 
across a variety of scientific disciplines (Fig. 2). This integration is cur-
rently in its nascent stages and has happened largely in an ad hoc fash-
ion in response to the growing need to understand machine behaviour. 
Currently, the scientists who most commonly study the behaviour of 
machines are the computer scientists, roboticists and engineers who 
have created the machines in the first place. These scientists may be 
expert mathematicians and engineers; however, they are typically 
not trained behaviourists. They rarely receive formal instruction on 
experimental methodology, population-based statistics and sampling 
paradigms, or observational causal inference, let alone neuroscience, 
collective behaviour or social theory. Conversely, although behavioural 
scientists are more likely to possess training in these scientific methods, 
they are less likely to possess the expertise required to proficiently eval-
uate the underlying quality and appropriateness of AI techniques for 
a given problem domain or to mathematically describe the properties 
of particular algorithms.
Integrating scientific practices from across multiple fields is not easy. 
Up to this point, the main focus of those who create AI systems has 
been on crafting, implementing and optimizing intelligent systems to 
478 | NATUR e  | v OL 568 | 25 APR i L 2019

===== PAGE 3 =====
Review ReSeARCH
perform specialized tasks. Excellent progress has been made on bench-
mark tasks—including board games such as chess 68, checkers69 and 
Go70,71, card games such as poker72, computer games such as those on 
the Atari platform73, artificial markets74 and Robocup Soccer75—as 
well as standardized evaluation data, such as the ImageNet data for 
object recognition76 and the Microsoft Common Objects in Context 
data for image-captioning tasks77. Success has also been achieved in 
speech recognition, language translation and autonomous locomotion. 
These benchmarks are coupled with metrics to quantify performance 
on standardized tasks78–81 and are used to improved performance, a 
proxy that enables AI builders to aim for better, faster and more-robust 
algorithms.
But methodologies aimed at maximized algorithmic performance 
are not optimal for conducting scientific observation of the properties 
and behaviours of AI agents. Rather than using metrics in the service 
of optimization against benchmarks, scholars of machine behaviour are 
interested in a broader set of indicators, much as social scientists explore 
a wide range of human behaviours in the realm of social, political or 
economic interactions82. As such, scholars of machine behaviour spend 
considerable effort in defining measures of micro and macro outcomes 
to answer broad questions such as how these algorithms behave in dif-
ferent environments and whether human interactions with algorithms 
alter societal outcomes. Randomized experiments, observational 
inference and population-based descriptive statistics—methods that 
are often used in quantitative behavioural sciences—must be central 
to the study of machine behaviour. Incorporating scholars from out-
side of the disciplines that traditionally produce intelligent machines 
can provide knowledge of important methodological tools, scientific 
approaches, alternative conceptual frameworks and perspectives on the 
economic, social and political phenomena that machines will increas-
ingly influence.
Type of question and object of study
Nikolaas Tinbergen, who won the 1973 Nobel Prize in Physiology or 
Medicine alongside Karl von Frisch and Konrad Lorenz for founding 
the field of ethology, identified four complementary dimensions of 
$14.99
$10.49
• Does the algorithm create ﬁlter bubbles?
• Does the algorithm disproportionately censor content?
Algorithmic justice
Democracy
News ranking algorithms
• Does the algorithm discriminate against a racial group in 
granting parole?
• Does a predictive policing system increase the false   
 conviction rate?
• How aggressively does the car overtake other vehicles?
• How does the car distribute risk between passengers 
and pedestrians?
Autonomous weapons
Kinetics
Autonomous vehicles
• Does the weapon respect necessity and proportionality in 
its use of force? 
• Does the weapon distinguish between combatants and 
civilians?
• Do algorithms manipulate markets?
• Does the behaviour of the algorithm increase systemic 
risk of market crash?
Algorithmic pricing
Markets
Algorithmic trading
• Do algorithms of competitors collude to ﬁx prices? 
• Does the algorithm exhibit price discrimination?
• Does the matching algorithm use facial features?
• Does the matching algorithm amplify or reduce 
homophily?
Conversational robots
Society
Online dating
• Does the robot promote products to children? 
• Does the algorithm affect collective behaviours?
Fig. 1 | Examples of questions that fall into the domain of machine behaviour. Questions of concern to machine behaviour span a wide variety of 
traditional scientific disciplines and topics.
25 APR i L 2019 | v OL 568 | NATUR e  | 479

===== PAGE 4 =====
ReviewReSeARCH
analysis that help to explain animal behaviour83. These dimensions 
concern questions of the function, mechanism, development and 
evolutionary history of a behaviour and provide an organizing frame-
work for the study of animal and human behaviour. For example, this 
conceptualization distinguishes the study of how a young animal or 
human develops a type of behaviour from the evolutionary trajectory 
that selected for such behaviour in the population. The goal of these 
distinctions is not division but rather integration. Although it is not 
wrong to say that, for example, a bird’s song is explained by learning 
or by its specific evolutionary history, a complete understanding of the 
song will require both.
Despite fundamental differences between machines and animals, 
the behavioural study of machines can benefit from a similar classifi-
cation. Machines have mechanisms that produce behaviour, undergo 
development that integrates environmental information into behav-
iour, produce functional consequences that cause specific machines to 
become more or less common in specific environments and embody 
evolutionary histories through which past environments and human 
decisions continue to influence machine behaviour. Scholars of com-
puter science have already achieved substantial gains in understanding 
the mechanisms and development of AI systems, although many ques-
tions remain. Relatively less emphasis has been placed on the function 
and evolution of AI systems. We discuss these four topics in the next 
subsections and provide Fig. 3 as a summary84.
Mechanisms for generating behaviour
The proximate causes of a machine’s behaviour have to do with how 
the behaviour is observationally triggered and generated in specific 
environments. For example, early algorithmic trading programs used 
simple rules to trigger buying and selling behaviour85. More sophisti-
cated agents may compute strategies based on adaptive heuristics or 
explicit maximization of expected utility86. The behaviour of a rein-
forcement learning algorithm that plays poker could be attributed to 
the particular way in which it represents the state space or evaluates 
the game tree72, and so on.
A mechanism depends on both an algorithm and its environment. A 
more sophisticated agent, such as a driverless car, may exhibit particular 
driving behaviour—for example, lane switching, overtaking or signal-
ling to pedestrians. These behaviours would be generated according 
to the algorithms that construct driving policies87 and are also shaped 
fundamentally by features of the perception and actuation system of 
the car, including the resolution and accuracy of its object detection 
and classification system, and the responsiveness and accuracy of its 
steering, among other factors. Because many current AI systems are 
derived from machine learning methods that are applied to increasingly 
complex data, the study of the mechanism behind a machine’s behav-
iour, such as those mentioned above, will require continued work on 
interpretability methods for machine learning46,88,89.
Development of behaviour
In the study of animal or human behaviour, development refers to how 
an individual acquires a particular behaviour—for example, through 
imitation or environmental conditioning. This is distinct from longer-
term evolutionary changes.
In the context of machines, we can ask how machines acquire 
(develop) a specific individual or collective behaviour. Behavioural 
development could be directly attributable to human engineering or 
design choices. Architectural design choices made by the programmer 
(for example, the value of a learning rate parameter, the acquisition  
of the representation of knowledge and state, or a particular wiring of 
a convolutional neural network) determine or influence the kinds of 
behaviours that the algorithm exhibits. In a more complex AI system, 
such as a driverless car, the behaviour of the car develops over time, 
from software development and changing hardware components that 
engineers incorporate into its overall architecture. Behaviours can also 
change as a result of algorithmic upgrades pushed to the machine by its 
designers after deployment.
A human engineer may also shape the behaviour of the machine by 
exposing it to particular training stimuli. For instance, many image 
and text classification algorithms are trained to optimize accuracy on 
a specific set of datasets that were manually labelled by humans. The 
choice of dataset—and those features it represents60,61—can substan -
tially influence the behaviour exhibited by the algorithm.
Finally, a machine may acquire behaviours through its own experi-
ence. For instance, a reinforcement learning agent trained to maximize 
long-term profit can learn peculiar short-term trading strategies based 
on its own past actions and concomitant feedback from the market90. 
Similarly, product recommendation algorithms make recommenda-
tions based on an endless stream of choices made by customers and 
update their recommendations accordingly.
Function
In the study of animal behaviour, adaptive value describes how a behav-
iour contributes to the lifetime reproductive fitness of an animal. For 
example, a particular hunting behaviour may be more or less successful 
than another at prolonging the animal’s life and, relatedly, the number 
of mating opportunities, resulting offspring born and the probable 
reproductive success of the offspring. The focus on function helps us 
to understand why some behavioural mechanisms spread and persist 
while others decline and vanish. Function depends critically on the fit 
of the behaviour to environment.
In the case of machines, we may talk of how the behaviour fulfils a 
contemporaneous function for particular human stakeholders. The 
human environment creates selective forces that may make some 
machines more common. Behaviours that are successful (‘fitness’ 
enhancing) get copied by developers of other software and hardware 
or are sometimes engineered to propagate among the machines them-
selves. These dynamics are ultimately driven by the success of institu-
tions—such as corporations, hospitals, municipal governments and 
universities—that build or use AI. The most obvious example is pro-
vided by algorithmic trading, in which successful automated trading 
strategies could be copied as their developers move from company to 
company, or are simply observed and reverse-engineered by rivals.
These forces can produce unanticipated effects. For example, objec-
tives such as maximizing engagement on a social media site may lead 
to so-called filter bubbles91, which may increase political polarization 
or, without careful moderation, could facilitate the spread of fake news. 
However, websites that do not optimize for user engagement may not be 
as successful in comparison with ones that do, or may go out of business 
altogether. Similarly, in the absence of external regulation, autonomous 
cars that do not prioritize the safety of their own passengers may be 
Scienti/f_ic study
of behaviour
Engineering
of AI
Machine
behaviour
New engineering practices
New scienti/f_ic questions
New quantitative evidence Study of impact
of technology
Fig. 2 | The interdisciplinarity of machine behaviour. Machine 
behaviour lies at the intersection of the fields that design and engineer AI 
systems and the fields that traditionally use scientific methods to study 
the behaviour of biological agents. The insights from machine behavioural 
studies provide quantitative evidence that can help to inform those fields 
that study the potential effects of technology on social and technological 
systems. In turn, those fields can provide useful engineering practices and 
scientific questions to fields that examine machine behaviours. Finally, 
the scientific study of behaviour helps AI scholars to make more precise 
statements about what AI systems can and cannot do.
480 | NATUR e  | v OL 568 | 25 APR i L 2019

===== PAGE 5 =====
Review ReSeARCH
less attractive to consumers, leading to fewer sales31. Sometimes the 
function of machine behaviour is to cope with the behaviour of other 
machines. Adversarial attacks—synthetic inputs that fool a system into 
producing an undesired output44,92–94—on AI systems and the subse -
quent responses of those who develop AI to these attacks95 may pro-
duce complex predator–prey dynamics that are not easily understood 
by studying each machine in isolation.
These examples highlight how incentives created by external institu-
tions and economic forces can have indirect but substantial effects on 
the behaviours exhibited by machines96. Understanding the interaction 
between these incentives and AI is relevant to the study of machine 
behaviour. These market dynamics would, in turn, interact with other 
processes to produce evolution among machines and algorithms.
Evolution
In the study of animal behaviour, phylogeny describes how a behav-
iour evolved. In addition to its current function, behaviour is influ-
enced by past selective pressures and previously evolved mechanisms. 
For example, the human hand evolved from the fin of a bony fish. Its 
current function is no longer for swimming, but its internal structure 
is explained by its evolutionary history. Non-selective forces, such as 
migration and drift, also have strong roles in explaining relationships 
among different forms of behaviour.
In the case of machines, evolutionary history can also generate path 
dependence, explaining otherwise puzzling behaviour. At each step, 
aspects of the algorithms are reused in new contexts, both constrain-
ing future behaviour and making possible additional innovations. For 
example, early choices about microprocessor design continue to influ-
ence modern computing, and traditions in algorithm design—such 
as neural networks and Bayesian state–space models—build in many 
assumptions and guide future innovations by making some new algo-
rithms easier to access than others. As a result, some algorithms may 
attend to certain features and ignore others because those features were 
important in early successful applications. Some machine behaviour 
may spread because it is ‘evolvable’—easy to modify and robust to per-
turbations—similar to how some traits of animals may be common 
because they facilitate diversity and stability97.
Machine behaviour evolves differently from animal behaviour. Most 
animal inheritance is simple—two parents, one transmission event. 
Algorithms are much more flexible and they have a designer with 
an objective in the background. The human environment strongly 
influences how algorithms evolve by changing their inheritance sys-
tem. AI replication behaviour may be facilitated through a culture of 
open source sharing of software, the details of network architecture 
or underlying training datasets. For instance, companies that develop 
software for driverless cars may share enhanced open source libraries 
for object detection or path planning as well as the training data that 
underlie these algorithms to enable safety-enhancing software to spread 
throughout the industry. It is possible for a single adaptive ‘mutation’ 
in the behaviour of a particular driverless car to propagate instantly 
to millions of other cars through a software update. However, other 
institutions apply limits as well. For example, software patents may 
impose constraints on the copying of particular behavioural traits. And 
regulatory constraints—such as privacy protection laws—can prevent 
machines from accessing, retaining or otherwise using particular infor-
mation in their decision-making. These peculiarities highlight the fact 
that machines may exhibit very different evolutionary trajectories, as 
they are not bound by the mechanisms of organic evolution.
Scale of inquiry
With the framework outlined above and in Fig. 3, we now catalogue 
examples of machine behaviour at the three scales of inquiry: individual 
machines, collectives of machines and groups of machines embedded  
in a social environment with groups of humans in hybrid or heter-
ogeneous systems39 (Fig. 4). Individual machine behaviour empha-
sizes the study of the algorithm itself, collective machine behaviour  
emphasizes the study of interactions between machines and hybrid 
human–machine behaviour emphasizes the study of interactions 
between machines and humans. Here we can draw an analogy to the 
study of a particular species, the study of interactions among members 
of a species and the interactions of the species with their broader envi-
ronment. Analyses at any of these scales may address any or all of the 
questions described in Fig. 3.
Individual machine behaviour
The study of the behaviour of individual machines focuses on specific 
intelligent machines by themselves. Often these studies focus on prop-
erties that are intrinsic to the individual machines and that are driven 
by their source code or design. The fields of machine learning and 
software engineering currently conduct the majority of these studies. 
There are two general approaches to the study of individual machine 
behaviour. The first focuses on profiling the set of behaviours of any 
Collective
HybridScale of inquiry
Individual
Object of study
Dynamic view
Explanation of current form in terms
of a historical sequence
Type of
question Static view
Explanation of the current
behaviour of a machine
Development (ontogeny)
Developmental explanations of how a type of 
machine acquires its behaviour, from 
deliberate engineering and supervised learning 
based on speci/f_ic benchmarks, to online 
learning and reinforcement learning in a 
particular environment.
Mechanism (causation)
Mechanistic explanations for what the 
behaviour is, and how it is constructed, 
including computational mechanisms 
or external stimuli that trigger it.
Proximate view 
How a particular
type of machine
functions
Ultimate
(evolutionary) view
Why a type of 
machine evolved
the behaviours it has
Evolution (phylogeny)
Incentives and market forces that describe 
why the behaviour evolved and spread, 
whether by programming or learning, 
subject to computational and institutional 
constraints.
Function (adaptive value)
The consequences of the machine’s 
behaviour in the current environment 
that cause it to persist, either by 
appeal for particular stakeholders 
(such as users or companies) or /f_it to 
some other aspect of the environment.
Fig. 3 | Tinbergen’s type of question and object of study modified for 
the study of machine behaviour. The four categories Tinbergen proposed 
for the study of animal behaviour can be adapted to the study of machine 
behaviour
83,84. Tinbergen’s framework proposes two types of question, 
how versus why, as well as two views of these questions, dynamic versus 
static. Each question can be examined at three scales of inquiry: individual 
machines, collectives of machines and hybrid human–machine systems.
25 APR i L 2019 | v OL 568 | NATUR e  | 481

===== PAGE 6 =====
ReviewReSeARCH
specific machine agent using a within-machine approach, comparing 
the behaviour of a particular machine across different conditions. The 
second, a between-machine approach, examines how a variety of indi-
vidual machine agents behave in the same condition.
A within-machine approach to the study of individual machine 
behaviours investigates questions such as whether there are constants 
that characterize the within-machine behaviour of any particular AI 
across a variety of contexts, how the behaviour of a particular AI pro-
gresses over time in the same, or different, environments and which 
environmental factors lead to the expression of particular behaviours 
by machines.
For instance, an algorithm may only exhibit certain behaviours if 
trained on particular underlying data98–100 (Fig. 3). Then, the ques-
tion becomes whether or not an algorithm that scores probability 
of recidivism in parole decisions7 would behave in unexpected ways 
when presented with evaluation data that diverge substantially from 
its training data. Other studies related to the characterization of  
within-machine behaviour include the study of individual robotic  
recovery behaviours101,102, the ‘cognitive’ attributes of algorithms and the 
utility of using techniques from psychology in the study of algorithmic  
behaviour103, and the examination of bot-specific characteristics such 
as those designed to influence human users104.
The second approach to the study of individual machine behaviour 
examines the same behaviours as they vary between machines. For 
example, those interested in examining advertising behaviours of intel-
ligent agents63,105,106 may investigate a variety of advertising platforms 
(and their underlying algorithms) and examine the between-machine 
effect of performing experiments with the same set of advertising inputs 
across platforms. The same approach could be used for investigations 
of dynamic pricing algorithms23,24,32 across platforms. Other between- 
machine studies might look at the different behaviours used by  
autonomous vehicles in their overtaking patterns or at the varied  
foraging behaviours exhibited by search and rescue drones107.
Collective machine behaviour
In contrast the study of the behaviour of individual machines, the study 
of collective machine behaviour focuses on the interactive and system- 
wide behaviours of collections of machine agents. In some cases, the 
implications of individual machine behaviour may make little sense 
until the collective level is considered. Some investigations of these 
systems have been inspired by natural collectives, such as swarms of 
insects, or mobile groups, such as flocking birds or schooling fish. For 
example, animal groups are known to exhibit both emergent sensing  
of complex environmental features 108 and effective consensus  
decision-making109. In both scenarios, groups exhibit an awareness of 
the environment that does not exist at the individual level. Fields such 
as multi-agent systems and computational game theory provide useful 
examples of the study of this area of machine behaviour.
Robots that use simple algorithms for local interactions between bots 
can nevertheless produce interesting behaviour once aggregated into 
large collectives. For example, scholars have examined the swarm-like 
properties of microrobots that combine into aggregations that resem-
ble swarms found in systems of biological agents 110,111. Additional 
examples include the collective behaviours of algorithms both in the 
laboratory (in the Game of Life112) as well as in the wild (as seen in 
Wikipedia-editing bots113). Other examples include the emergence 
of novel algorithmic languages 114 between communicating intelli -
gent machines as well as the dynamic properties of fully autonomous 
transportation systems. Ultimately, many interesting questions in this 
domain remain to be examined.
The vast majority of work on collective animal behaviour and col-
lective robotics has focused on how interactions among simple agents 
can create higher-order structures and properties. Although important, 
this neglects that fact that many organisms, and increasingly also AI 
agents75, are sophisticated entities with behaviours and interactions 
that may not be well-characterized by simplistic representations. 
Revealing what extra properties emerge when interacting entities 
are capable of sophisticated cognition remains a key challenge in 
the biological sciences and may have direct parallels in the study of 
machine behaviour. For example, similar to animals, machines may 
exhibit ‘social learning’ . Such social learning does not need be limited 
to machines learning from machines, but we may expect machines to 
learn from humans, and vice versa for humans to learn from the behav-
iour of machines. The feedback processes introduced may fundamen-
tally alter the accumulation of knowledge, including across generations, 
directly affecting human and machine ‘culture’ .
In addition, human-made AI systems do not necessarily face the 
same constraints as do organisms, and collective assemblages of 
machines provide new capabilities, such as instant global communi-
cation, that can lead to entirely new collective behavioural patterns. 
Studies in collective machine behaviour examine the properties of 
assemblages of machines as well as the unexpected properties that can 
emerge from these complex systems of interactions.
For example, some of the most interesting collective behaviour 
of algorithms has been observed in financial trading environments. 
These environments operate on tiny time scales, such that algorithmic 
traders can respond to events and each other ahead of any human 
trader115. Under certain conditions, high-frequency capabilities can 
produce inefficiencies in financial markets 26,115. In addition to the 
unprecedented response speed, the extensive use of machine learning, 
autonomous operation and ability to deploy at scale are all reasons 
to believe that the collective behaviour of machine trading may be 
qualitatively different than that of human traders. Furthermore, these 
financial algorithms and trading systems are necessarily trained on 
certain historic datasets and react to a limited variety of foreseen sce-
narios, leading to the question of how they will react to situations that 
are new and unforeseen in their design. Flash crashes are examples of 
clearly unintended consequences of (interacting) algorithms116,117; 
leading to the question of whether algorithms could interact to create 
a larger market crisis.
Hybrid human–machine behaviour
Humans increasingly interact with machines16. They mediate our social 
interactions39, shape the news14,17,55,56 and online information15,118 that 
we see, and form relationships with us that can alter our social systems. 
Because of their complexity, these hybrid human–machine systems 
1010101101001001010101010101010101010101010101010 01010101010101010101101010101011011010101010101010101010101010101
1011101011010101011101011101010101010101010010 0101010010101010101010100101010101010101010101010100110
1010101010
010011100011010100101001111111101
101000000110101010101001110001101Data
Individual machine
behaviour
Collective machine behaviour
Hybrid human–machine behaviour
Fig. 4 | Scale of inquiry in the machine behaviour ecosystem. AI systems 
represent the amalgamation of humans, data and algorithms. Each of 
these domains influences the other in both well-understood and unknown 
ways. Data—filtered through algorithms created by humans—influences 
individual and collective machine behaviour. AI systems are trained 
on the data, in turn influencing how humans generate data. AI systems 
collectively interact with and influence one another. Human interactions 
can be altered by the introduction of these AI systems. Studies of machine 
behaviour tend to occur at the individual, the collective or the hybrid 
human–machine scale of inquiry.
482 | NATUR e  | v OL 568 | 25 APR i L 2019

===== PAGE 7 =====
Review ReSeARCH
pose one of the most technically difficult yet simultaneously most 
important areas of study for machine behaviour.
Machines shape human behaviour
One of the most obvious—but nonetheless vital—domains of the study 
of machine behaviour concerns the ways in which the introduction of 
intelligent machines into social systems can alter human beliefs and 
behaviours. As in the introduction of automation to industrial pro-
cesses119, intelligent machines can create social problems in the process 
of improving existing problems. Numerous problems and questions 
arise during this process, such as whether the matching algorithms that 
are used for online dating alter the distributional outcomes of the dating 
process or whether news-filtering algorithms alter the distribution of 
public opinion. It is important to investigate whether small errors in 
algorithms or the data that they use could compound to produce society- 
wide effects and how intelligent robots in our schools, hospitals120 and 
care centres might alter human development121 and quality of life54 and 
potentially affect outcomes for people with disabilities122.
Other questions in this domain relate to the potential for machines 
to alter the social fabric in more fundamental ways. For example, ques-
tions include to what extent and what ways are governments using 
machine intelligence to alter the nature of democracy, political account-
ability and transparency, or civic participation. Other questions include 
to what degree intelligent machines influence policing, surveillance 
and warfare, as well as how large of an effect bots have had on the out-
comes of elections56 and whether AI systems that aid in the formation 
of human social relationships can enable collective action.
Notably, studies in this area also examine how humans perceive the 
use of machines as decision aids8,123, human preferences for and against 
making use of algorithms 124, and the degree to which human-like 
machines produce or reduce discomfort in humans39,125. An important 
question in this area includes how humans respond to the increasing 
coproduction of economic goods and services in tandem with intelli-
gent machines126. Ultimately, understanding how human systems can 
be altered by the introduction of intelligent machines into our lives is 
a vital component of the study of machine behaviour.
Humans shape machine behaviour
Intelligent machines can alter human behaviour, and humans also cre-
ate, inform and mould the behaviours of intelligent machines. We shape 
machine behaviours through the direct engineering of AI systems and 
through the training of these systems on both active human input and 
passive observations of human behaviours through the data that we 
create daily. The choice of which algorithms to use, what feedback to 
provide to those algorithms3,127 and on which data to train them are 
also, at present, human decisions and can directly alter machine behav-
iours. An important component in the study of machine behaviour 
is to understand how these engineering processes alter the resulting 
behaviours of AI, whether the training data are responsible for a par-
ticular behaviour of the machine, whether it is the algorithm itself or 
whether it is a combination of both algorithm and data. The framework 
outlined in Fig. 3 suggests that there will be complementary answers 
to the each of these questions. Examining how altering the parame-
ters of the engineering process can alter the subsequent behaviours 
of intelligent machines as they interact with other machines and with 
humans in natural settings is central to a holistic understanding of 
machine behaviour.
Human–machine co-behaviour
Although it can be methodologically convenient to separate studies 
into the ways that humans shape machines and vice versa, most AI sys-
tems function in domains where they co-exist with humans in complex 
hybrid systems39,67,125,128. Questions of importance to the study of these 
systems include those that examine the behaviours that characterize 
human–machine interactions including cooperation, competition and 
coordination—for example, how human biases combine with AI to 
alter human emotions or beliefs14,55,56,129,130, how human tendencies 
couple with algorithms to facilitate the spread of information55, how 
traffic patterns can be altered in streets populated by large numbers of 
both driverless and human-driven cars and how trading patterns can 
be altered by interactions between humans and algorithmic trading 
agents29 as well as which factors can facilitate trust and cooperation 
between humans and machines88,131.
Another topic in this area relates to robotic and software-driven 
automation of human labour132. Here we see two different types of 
machine–human interactions. One is that machines can enhance a 
human’s efficiency, such as in robotic- and computer-aided surgery. 
Another is that machines can replace humans, such as in driverless 
transportation and package delivery. This leads to questions about 
whether machines end up doing more of the replacing or the enhanc-
ing in the longer run and what human–machine co-behaviours will 
evolve as a result.
The above examples highlight that many of the questions that relate 
to hybrid human–machine behaviours must necessarily examine the 
feedback loops between human influence on machine behaviour and 
machine influence on human behaviour simultaneously. Scholars have 
begun to examine human–machine interactions in formal laboratory 
environments, observing that interactions with simple bots can increase 
human coordination 39 and that bots can cooperate directly with 
humans at levels that rival human–human cooperation133. However, 
there remains an urgent need to further understand feedback loops in 
natural settings, in which humans are increasingly using algorithms 
to make decisions134 and subsequently informing the training of the 
same algorithms through those decisions. Furthermore, across all types 
of questions in the domain of machine behavioural ecology, there is 
a need for studies that examine longer-run dynamics of these hybrid 
systems53 with particular emphasis on the ways that human social 
interactions135,136 may be modified by the introduction of intelligent 
machines137.
Outlook
Furthering the study of machine behaviour is critical to maximizing the 
potential benefits of AI for society. The consequential choices that we 
make regarding the integration of AI agents into human lives must be 
made with some understanding of the eventual societal implications of 
these choices. To provide this understanding and anticipation, we need 
a new interdisciplinary field of scientific study: machine behaviour.
For this field to succeed, there are a number of relevant consid -
erations. First, studying machine behaviour does not imply that AI 
algorithms necessarily have independent agency nor does it imply algo-
rithms should bear moral responsibility for their actions. If a dog bites 
someone, the dog’s owner is held responsible. Nonetheless, it is useful 
to study the behavioural patterns of animals to predict such aberrant 
behaviour. Machines operate within a larger socio-technical fabric, and 
their human stakeholders are ultimately responsible for any harm their 
deployment might cause.
Second, some commentators might suggest that treating AI systems 
as agents occludes the focus on the underlying data that such AI sys-
tems are trained on. Indeed, no behaviour is ever fully separable from 
the environmental data on which that agent is trained or developed; 
machine behaviour is no exception. However, it is just as critical to 
understand how machine behaviours vary with altered environmental 
inputs as it is to understand how biological agents’ behaviours vary 
depending on the environments in which they exist. As such, scholars 
of machine behaviour should focus on characterizing agent behaviour 
across diverse environments, much as behavioural scientists desire to 
characterize political behaviours across differing demographic and 
institutional contexts.
Third, machines exhibit behaviours that are fundamentally different 
from animals and humans, so we must avoid excessive anthropomor-
phism and zoomorphism. Even if borrowing existing behavioural sci-
entific methods can prove useful for the study of machines, machines 
may exhibit forms of intelligence and behaviour that are qualitatively  
different—even alien—from those seen in biological agents. 
25 APR i L 2019 | v OL 568 | NATUR e  | 483

===== PAGE 8 =====
ReviewReSeARCH
Furthermore, AI scientists can dissect and modify AI systems more 
easily and more thoroughly than is the case for many living systems. 
Although parallels exist, the study of AI systems will necessarily differ 
from the study of living systems.
Fourth, the study of machine behaviour will require cross-discipli-
nary efforts82,103 and will entail all of the challenges associated with 
such research138,139. Addressing these challenges is vital140. Universities 
and governmental funding agencies can play an important part in the 
design of large-scale, neutral and trusted cross-disciplinary studies141.
Fifth, the study of machine behaviour will often require experimen-
tal intervention to study human–machine interactions in real-world 
settings142,143. These interventions could alter the overall behaviour of 
the system, possibly having adverse effects on normal users144. Ethical 
considerations such as these need careful oversight and standardized 
frameworks.
Finally, studying intelligent algorithmic or robotic systems can result 
in legal and ethical problems for researchers studying machine behav-
iour. Reverse-engineering algorithms may require violating the terms 
of service of some platforms; for example, in setting up fake personas 
or masking true identities. The creators or maintainers of the systems 
of interest could embroil researchers in legal challenges if the research 
damages the reputation of their platforms. Moreover, it remains unclear 
whether violating terms of service may expose researchers to civil or 
criminal penalties (for example, through the Computer Fraud and 
Abuse Act in the United States), which may further discourage this 
type of research145.
Understanding the behaviours and properties of AI agents—and the 
effects they might have on human systems—is critical. Society can ben-
efit tremendously from the efficiencies and improved decision-making 
that can come from these agents. At the same time, these benefits may 
falter without minimizing the potential pitfalls of the incorporation of 
AI agents into everyday human life.
Received: 20 September 2018; Accepted: 14 March 2019;  
Published online 24 April 2019.
 1. Simon, H. A. The Sciences of the Artificial (MIT Press, Cambridge, 1969).  
Simon asks whether there can be a science of the ‘artificial’ that produces 
knowledge about artificial objects and phenomena.
 2. Milner, R. A modal characterisation of observable machine-behaviour. In Trees 
in Algebra and Programming, 6th Colloquium 25–34 (Springer, 1981). 
 
In this invited lecture, Robin Milner outlines the idea of studying machine 
behaviour using formal logic.
 3. Thomaz, A. L. & Breazeal, C. Teachable robots: understanding human teaching 
behavior to build more effective robot learners. Artif. Intell. 172, 716–737 (2008).
 4. Stone, P. et al. Artificial Intelligence and Life in 2030. One Hundred Year Study on 
Artificial Intelligence: Report of the 2015–2016 Study Panel https://
 
ai100.stanford.edu/2016-report (Stanford University, 2016).
 5. O’Neil, C. Weapons of Math Destruction: How Big Data Increases Inequality and 
Threatens Democracy (Broadway Books, 2016).  
This book articulates some of the risks posed by the uncritical use of algorithms 
in society and provides motivation for the study of machine behaviour.
 6. Future of Life Institute. Autonomous weapons: an open letter from AI & 
robotics researchers. https://futureoflife.org/open-letter-autonomous-
weapons/?cn-reloaded=1 (2015).
 7. Dressel, J. & Farid, H. The accuracy, fairness, and limits of predicting 
recidivism. Sci. Adv. 4, eaao5580 (2018).
 8. Binns, R. et al. ‘It’s reducing a human being to a percentage’: perceptions of 
justice in algorithmic decisions. In Proc. 2018 CHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems 377 (ACM, 2018).
 9. Hudson, L., Owens, C. S. & Flannes, M. Drone warfare: blowback from the new 
American way of war. Middle East Policy 18, 122–132 (2011).
 10. Kahneman, D., Rosenfield, A. M., Gandhi, L. & Blaser, T. Noise: how to overcome 
the high, hidden cost of inconsistent decision making. Harvard Business Review 
https://hbr.org/2016/10/noise (2016).
 11. Kleinberg, J., Lakkaraju, H., Leskovec, J., Ludwig, J. & Mullainathan, S. Human 
decisions and machine predictions. Q. J. Econ. 133, 237–293 (2018).
 12. Crawford, K. et al. The AI Now report: The Social and Economic Implications of 
Artificial Intelligence Technologies in the Near-term. https://ainowinstitute.org/
AI_Now_2016_Report.pdf (2016).
 13. Amodei, D. et al. Concrete problems in AI safety. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
abs/1606.06565 (2016).
 14. Bakshy, E., Messing, S. & Adamic, L. A. Exposure to ideologically diverse news 
and opinion on Facebook. Science 348, 1130–1132 (2015).
 15. Bessi, A. & Ferrara, E. Social bots distort the 2016 U.S. Presidential election 
online discussion. First Monday 21, 11 (2016).
 16. Ferrara, E., Varol, O., Davis, C., Menczer, F. & Flammini, A. The rise of social bots. 
Commun. ACM 59, 96–104 (2016).
 17. Lazer, D. The rise of the social algorithm. Science 348, 1090–1091 (2015).
 18. Tufekci, Z. Engineering the public: big data, surveillance and computational 
politics. First Monday 19, 7 (2014).
 19. Lee, T.-S. & Chen, I.-F. A two-stage hybrid credit scoring model using artificial 
neural networks and multivariate adaptive regression splines. Expert Syst. Appl. 
28, 743–752 (2005).
 20. Roszbach, K. Bank lending policy, credit scoring, and the survival of loans. 
 
Rev. Econ. Stat. 86, 946–958 (2004).
 21. Huang, C.-L., Chen, M.-C. & Wang, C.-J. Credit scoring with a data mining 
approach based on support vector machines. Expert Syst. Appl. 33, 847–856 
(2007).
 22. Tsai, C.-F. & Wu, J.-W. Using neural network ensembles for bankruptcy 
prediction and credit scoring. Expert Syst. Appl. 34, 2639–2649 (2008).
 23. Chen, L. & Wilson, C. Observing algorithmic marketplaces in-the-wild. SIGecom 
Exch. 15, 34–39 (2017).
 24. Chen, L., Mislove, A. & Wilson, C. An empirical analysis of algorithmic pricing 
on Amazon marketplace. In Proc. 25th International Conference on World Wide 
Web 1339–1349 (International World Wide Web Conferences Steering 
Committee, 2016).
 25. Hannák, A. et al. Bias in Online freelance marketplaces: evidence from 
TaskRabbit and Fiverr. In Proc. ACM Conference on Computer Supported 
Cooperative Work and Social Computing 1914–1933 (2017).
 26. Cartlidge, J., Szostek, C., De Luca, M. & Cliff, D. Too fast too furious—faster 
financial-market trading agents can give less efficient markets. In Proc. 4th 
International Conference on Agents and Artificial Intelligence 126–135 (2012).
 27. Kearns, M., Kulesza, A. & Nevmyvaka, Y. Empirical limitations on high-
frequency trading profitability. J. Trading 5, 50–62 (2010).
 28. Wellman, M. P. & Rajan, U. Ethical issues for autonomous trading agents. Minds 
Mach. 27, 609–624 (2017).
 29. Farmer, J. D. & Skouras, S. An ecological perspective on the future of computer 
trading. Quant. Finance 13, 325–346 (2013).
 30. Perry, W. L., McInnis, B., Price, C. C., Smith, S. & Hollywood, J. S. Predictive 
Policing: The Role of Crime Forecasting in Law Enforcement Operations (RAND, 
2013).
 31. Bonnefon, J.-F., Shariff, A. & Rahwan, I. The social dilemma of autonomous 
vehicles. Science 352, 1573–1576 (2016).
 32. Kooti, F. et al. Analyzing Uber’s ride-sharing economy. In Proc. 26th 
International Conference on World Wide Web 574–582 (International World 
Wide Web Conferences Steering Committee, 2017).
 33. Zeng, X., Fapojuwo, A. O. & Davies, R. J. Design and performance evaluation of 
voice activated wireless home devices. IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. 52, 
983–989 (2006).
 34. Hendriks, B., Meerbeek, B., Boess, S., Pauws, S. & Sonneveld, M. Robot vacuum 
cleaner personality and behavior. Int. J. Soc. Robot. 3, 187–195 (2011).
 35. Hitsch, G. J., Hortaçsu, A. & Ariely, D. Matching and sorting in online dating. 
Am. Econ. Rev. 100, 130–163 (2010).
 36. Finkel, E. J., Eastwick, P. W., Karney, B. R., Reis, H. T. & Sprecher, S. Online 
dating: a critical analysis from the perspective of psychological science. 
Psychol. Sci. Public Interest 13, 3–66 (2012).
 37. Park, H. W., Rosenberg-Kima, R., Rosenberg, M., Gordon, G. & Breazeal, C. 
Growing growth mindset with a social robot peer. In Proc. 2017 ACM/IEEE 
International Conference on Human–Robot Interaction 137–145 (ACM, 2017).
 38. Bemelmans, R., Gelderblom, G. J., Jonker, P. & de Witte, L. Socially assistive 
robots in elderly care: a systematic review into effects and effectiveness. J. Am. 
Med. Dir. Assoc. 13, 114–120 (2012).
 39. Shirado, H. & Christakis, N. A. Locally noisy autonomous agents improve global 
human coordination in network experiments. Nature 545, 370–374 (2017). 
 
In this human–machine hybrid study, the authors show that simple 
algorithms injected into human gameplay can improve coordination 
outcomes among humans.
 40. Pichai, S. AI at Google: Our Principles. Google Blog https://blog.google/topics/
ai/ai-principles/ (2018).
 41. Roff, H. M. The strategic robot problem: lethal autonomous weapons in war. 
 
J. Mil. Ethics 13, 211–227 (2014).
 42. Krishnan, A. Killer Robots: Legality and Ethicality of Autonomous Weapons 
(Routledge, 2016).
 43. Voosen, P. The AI detectives. Science 357, 22–27 (2017).
 44. Szegedy, C. et al. Intriguing properties of neural networks. Preprint at https://
arxiv.org/abs/1312.6199 (2013).
 45. Zhang, Q.-S. & Zhu, S.-C. Visual interpretability for deep learning: a survey. 
Front. Inf. Technol. Electronic Eng. 19, 27–39 (2018).
 46. Doshi-Velez, F. & Kim, B. Towards a rigorous science of interpretable machine 
learning. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1702.08608 (2017).
 47. Gebru, T. et al. Datasheets for datasets. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
abs/1803.09010 (2018).
 48. Mitchell, M. et al. Model cards for model reporting. Preprint at https://
 
arxiv.org/abs/1810.03993 (2018).
 49. Lakkaraju, H., Kamar, E., Caruana, R. & Horvitz, E. Identifying unknown 
unknowns in the open world: representations and policies for guided 
exploration. In Proc. 31st Association for the Advancement of Artificial 
Intelligence Conference on Artificial Intelligence 2 (2017).
 50. Johnson, N. et al. Abrupt rise of new machine ecology beyond human 
response time. Sci. Rep. 3, 2627 (2013).
 51. Appel, K., Haken, W. & Koch, J. Every planar map is four colorable. Part II: 
reducibility. Illinois J. Math. 21, 491–567 (1977).
484 | NATUR e  | v OL 568 | 25 APR i L 2019

===== PAGE 9 =====
Review ReSeARCH
 52. Appel, K. & Haken, W. Every planar map is four colorable. Part I: discharging. 
Illinois J. Math. 21, 429–490 (1977).
 53. Westlund, J. M. K., Park, H. W., Williams, R. & Breazeal, C. Measuring young 
children’s long-term relationships with social robots. In Proc. 17th ACM 
Conference on Interaction Design and Children 207–218 (ACM, 2018).
 54. Lorenz, T., Weiss, A. & Hirche, S. Synchrony and reciprocity: key mechanisms 
for social companion robots in therapy and care. Int. J. Soc. Robot. 8, 125–143 
(2016).
 55. Vosoughi, S., Roy, D. & Aral, S. The spread of true and false news online. 
Science 359, 1146–1151 (2018). 
 
This study examines the complex hybrid ecology of bots and humans on 
Twitter and finds that humans spread false information at higher rates  
than bots.
 56. Lazer, D. M. J. et al. The science of fake news. Science 359, 1094–1096 (2018).
 57. Roberts, M. E. Censored: Distraction and Diversion Inside China’s Great Firewall 
(Princeton Univ. Press, 2018).
 58. Corbett-Davies, S., Pierson, E., Feller, A., Goel, S. & Huq, A. Algorithmic decision 
making and the cost of fairness. In Proc. 23rd ACM SIGKDD International 
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 797–806 (ACM, 2017).
 59. Kleinberg, J., Mullainathan, S. & Raghavan, M. Inherent trade-offs in the fair 
determination of risk scores. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1609.05807 
(2016).
 60. Buolamwini, J. & Gebru, T. Gender shades: intersectional accuracy disparities 
in commercial gender classification. In Proc. 1st Conference on Fairness, 
Accountability and Transparency (eds Friedler, S. A. & Wilson, C.) 81, 77–91 
(PMLR, 2018).
 61. Bolukbasi, T., Chang, K.-W., Zou, J. Y., Saligrama, V. & Kalai, A. T. Man is to 
computer programmer as woman is to homemaker? Debiasing word 
embeddings. In Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 
4349–4357 (2016).
 62. Caliskan, A., Bryson, J. J. & Narayanan, A. Semantics derived automatically 
from language corpora contain human-like biases. Science 356, 183–186 
(2017).
 63. Sweeney, L. Discrimination in online ad delivery. Queueing Syst. 11, 10 
 
(2013).
 64. Ensign, D., Friedler, S. A., Neville, S., Scheidegger, C. & Venkatasubramanian, S. 
Runaway feedback loops in predictive policing. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
abs/1706.09847 (2017).
 65. Angwin, J., Larson, J., Mattu, S. & Kirchner, L. Machine bias. ProPublica https://
www.propublica.org/article/machine-bias-risk-assessments-in-criminal-
sentencing (2016).
 66. Chouldechova, A., Benavides-Prado, D., Fialko, O. & Vaithianathan, R. A case 
study of algorithm-assisted decision making in child maltreatment hotline 
screening decisions. In Proc. 1st Conference on Fairness, Accountability and 
Transparency (eds Friedler, S. A. & Wilson, C.) 81, 134–148 (PMLR, 2018).
 67. Jennings, N. R. et al. Human–agent collectives. Commun. ACM 57, 80–88 
(2014).
 68. Campbell, M., Hoane, A. J. & Hsu, F.-H. Deep blue. Artif. Intell. 134, 57–83 
(2002).
 69. Schaeffer, J. et al. Checkers is solved. Science 317, 1518–1522 (2007).
 70. Silver, D. et al. Mastering the game of Go with deep neural networks and tree 
search. Nature 529, 484–489 (2016).
 71. Silver, D. et al. Mastering the game of Go without human knowledge. Nature 
550, 354–359 (2017).
 72. Bowling, M., Burch, N., Johanson, M. & Tammelin, O. Heads-up limit hold’em 
poker is solved. Science 347, 145–149 (2015).
 73. Bellemare, M. G., Naddaf, Y., Veness, J. & Bowling, M. The arcade learning 
environment: an evaluation platform for general agents. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 47, 
253–279 (2013).
 74. Wellman, M. P. et al. Designing the market game for a trading agent 
competition. IEEE Internet Comput. 5, 43–51 (2001).
 75. Kitano, H., Asada, M., Kuniyoshi, Y., Noda, I. & Osawa, E. RoboCup: the robot 
world cup initiative. In Proc. 1st International Conference on Autonomous Agents 
340–347 (ACM, 1997).
 76. Russakovsky, O. et al. ImageNet large scale visual recognition challenge. Int. J. 
Comput. Vis. 115, 211–252 (2015).
 77. Lin, T.-Y. et al. Microsoft COCO: common objects in context. In Proc. European 
Conference on Computer Vision (eds Fleet, D. et al.) 8693, 740–755 (Springer 
International Publishing, 2014).
 78. Davis, J. & Goadrich, M. The relationship between precision–recall and ROC 
curves. In Proc. 23rd International Conference on Machine Learning 233–240 
(ACM, 2006).
 79. van de Sande, K. E. A., Gevers, T. & Snoek, C. G. M. Evaluating color descriptors 
for object and scene recognition. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 32, 
1582–1596 (2010).
 80. Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T. & Zhu, W.-J. BLEU: a method for automatic 
evaluation of machine translation. In Proc. 40th Annual Meeting on Association 
for Computational Linguistics 311–318 (Association for Computational 
Linguistics, 2002).
 81. Zhou, Z., Zhang, W. & Wang, J. Inception score, label smoothing, gradient 
vanishing and -log(D(x)) alternative. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
abs/1708.01729 (2017).
 82. Epstein, Z. et al. Closing the AI knowledge gap. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
abs/1803.07233 (2018).
 83. Tinbergen, N. On aims and methods of ethology. Ethology 20, 410–433 (1963).
 84. Nesse, R. M. Tinbergen’s four questions, organized: a response to Bateson and 
Laland. Trends Ecol. Evol. 28, 681–682 (2013).
 85. Das, R., Hanson, J. E., Kephart, J. O. & Tesauro, G. Agent–human interactions in 
the continuous double auction. In Proc. 17th International Joint Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence 1169–1178 (Lawrence Erlbaum, 2001).
 86. Deng, Y., Bao, F., Kong, Y., Ren, Z. & Dai, Q. Deep direct reinforcement learning 
for financial signal representation and trading. IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. 
Syst. 28, 653–664 (2017).
 87. Galceran, E., Cunningham, A. G., Eustice, R. M. & Olson, E. Multipolicy 
decision-making for autonomous driving via changepoint-based behavior 
prediction: theory and experiment. Auton. Robots 41, 1367–1382 (2017).
 88. Ribeiro, M. T., Singh, S. & Guestrin, C. Why should I trust you? Explaining the 
predictions of any classifier. In Proc. 22nd ACM SIGKDD International 
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 1135–1144 (ACM, 2016).
 89. Smilkov, D., Thorat, N., Kim, B., Viégas, F. & Wattenberg, M. SmoothGrad: 
removing noise by adding noise. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
abs/1706.03825 (2017).
 90. Nevmyvaka, Y., Feng, Y. & Kearns, M. reinforcement learning for optimized 
trade execution. In Proc. 23rd International Conference on Machine Learning 
673–680 (ACM, 2006).
 91. Nguyen, T. T., Hui, P.-M., Harper, F. M., Terveen, L. & Konstan, J. A. Exploring the 
filter bubble: the effect of using recommender systems on content diversity. In 
Proc. 23rd International Conference on World Wide Web 677–686 (ACM, 2014).
 92. Dalvi, N. & Domingos, P. Mausam, Sanghai, S. & Verma, D. Adversarial 
classification. In Proc. Tenth ACM SIGKDD International Conference on 
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 99–108 (ACM, 2004).
 93. Globerson, A. & Roweis, S. Nightmare at test time: robust learning by feature 
deletion. In Proc. 23rd International Conference on Machine Learning 353–360 
(ACM, 2006).
 94. Biggio, B. et al. Evasion attacks against machine learning at test time. In Proc. 
Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in 
Databases 387–402 (Springer, 2013).
 95. Tramèr, F. et al. Ensemble adversarial training: attacks and defenses. Preprint 
at https://arxiv.org/abs/1705.07204 (2017).
 96. Parkes, D. C. & Wellman, M. P. Economic reasoning and artificial intelligence. 
Science 349, 267–272 (2015).
 97. Wagner, A. Robustness and Evolvability in Living Systems (Princeton Univ. Press, 
2013).
 98. Edwards, H. & Storkey, A. Censoring representations with an adversary. 
Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05897 (2015).
 99. Zemel, R., Wu, Y., Swersky, K., Pitassi, T. & Dwork, C. learning fair 
representations. In Proc. International Conference on Machine Learning 
325–333 (2013).
 100. Feldman, M., Friedler, S. A., Moeller, J., Scheidegger, C. & Venkatasubramanian, 
S. Certifying and removing disparate impact. In Proc. 21th ACM SIGKDD 
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining 259–268 
(ACM, 2015).
 101. Cully, A., Clune, J., Tarapore, D. & Mouret, J.-B. Robots that can adapt like 
animals. Nature 521, 503–507 (2015). 
 
This study characterizes a robot driven by an adaptive algorithm that mimics 
the adaptation and behaviours of animals.
 102. Bongard, J., Zykov, V. & Lipson, H. Resilient machines through continuous 
self-modeling. Science 314, 1118–1121 (2006).
 103. Leibo, J. Z. et al. Psychlab: a psychology laboratory for deep reinforcement 
learning agents. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.08116 (2018). 
 
In this study, the authors use behavioural tools from the life sciences in the 
study of machine behaviours.
 104. Subrahmanian, V. S. et al. The DARPA Twitter bot challenge. Preprint at 
https://arxiv.org/abs/1601.05140 (2016).
 105. Carrascosa, J. M., Mikians, J., Cuevas, R., Erramilli, V. & Laoutaris, N. I. Always 
feel like somebody’s watching me: measuring online behavioural advertising. 
In Proc. 11th ACM Conference on Emerging Networking Experiments and 
Technologies 13 (ACM, 2015).
 106. Datta, A., Tschantz, M. C. & Datta, A. Automated Experiments on Ad Privacy 
Settings. Proc. Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2015, 92–112 (2015).
 107. Giusti, A. et al. A machine learning approach to visual perception of forest trails 
for mobile robots. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett. 1, 661–667 (2016).
 108. Berdahl, A., Torney, C. J., Ioannou, C. C., Faria, J. J. & Couzin, I. D. Emergent 
sensing of complex environments by mobile animal groups. Science 339, 
574–576 (2013).
 109. Couzin, I. D. et al. Uninformed individuals promote democratic consensus in 
animal groups. Science 334, 1578–1580 (2011).
 110. Rubenstein, M., Cornejo, A. & Nagpal, R. Programmable self-assembly in a 
thousand-robot swarm. Science 345, 795–799 (2014).
 111. Kernbach, S., Thenius, R., Kernbach, O. & Schmickl, T. Re-embodiment of 
honeybee aggregation behavior in an artificial micro-robotic system. Adapt. 
Behav. 17, 237–259 (2009).
 112. Bak, P., Chen, K. & Creutz, M. Self-organized criticality in the ‘Game of Life’. 
Nature 342, 780–782 (1989).
 113. Tsvetkova, M., García-Gavilanes, R., Floridi, L. & Yasseri, T. Even good bots fight: 
the case of Wikipedia. PLoS ONE 12, e0171774 (2017).
 114. Lazaridou, A., Peysakhovich, A. & Baroni, M. Multi-agent cooperation and the 
emergence of (natural) language. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
abs/1612.07182 (2016).
 115. Budish, E., Cramton, P. & Shim, J. The high-frequency trading arms race: 
frequent batch auctions as a market design response. Q. J. Econ. 130, 
1547–1621 (2015).
 116. Kirilenko, A. A. & Lo, A. W. Moore’s law versus Murphy’s law: algorithmic 
trading and its discontents. J. Econ. Perspect. 27, 51–72 (2013).
25 APR i L 2019 | v OL 568 | NATUR e  | 485

===== PAGE 10 =====
ReviewReSeARCH
 117. Menkveld, A. J. The economics of high-frequency trading: taking stock. Annu. 
Rev. Financ. Econ. 8, 1–24 (2016).
 118. Mønsted, B., Sapieżyński, P., Ferrara, E. & Lehmann, S. Evidence of complex 
contagion of information in social media: an experiment using Twitter bots. 
PLoS ONE 12, e0184148 (2017).  
This study presents an experimental intervention on Twitter using bots and 
provides evidence that information diffusion is most accurately described by 
complex contagion.
 119. Bainbridge, L. Ironies of automation. Automatica 19, 775–779 (1983).
 120. Jeong, S., Breazeal, C., Logan, D. & Weinstock, P. Huggable: the impact of 
embodiment on promoting socio-emotional interactions for young pediatric 
inpatients. In Proc. 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems 495 (ACM, 2018).
 121. Kory Westlund, J. M. et al. Flat vs. expressive storytelling: young children’s 
learning and retention of a social robot’s narrative. Front. Hum. Neurosci. 11, 
295 (2017).
 122. Salisbury, E., Kamar, E. & Morris, M. R. Toward scalable social alt text: 
conversational crowdsourcing as a tool for refining vision-to-language 
technology for the blind. Proc. 5th AAAI Conference on Human Computation and 
Crowdsourcing (2017).
 123. Awad, E. et al. The Moral Machine experiment. Nature 563, 59–64 (2018).
 124. Dietvorst, B. J., Simmons, J. P. & Massey, C. Algorithm aversion: people 
erroneously avoid algorithms after seeing them err. J. Exp. Psychol. Gen. 144, 
114–126 (2015).
 125. Gray, K. & Wegner, D. M. Feeling robots and human zombies: mind perception 
and the uncanny valley. Cognition 125, 125–130 (2012).
 126. Brynjolfsson, E. & Mitchell, T. What can machine learning do? Workforce 
implications. Science 358, 1530–1534 (2017).
 127. Christiano, P. F. et al. Deep reinforcement learning from human preferences. In 
Proc. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 30 (eds Guyon, I. et 
al.) 4299–4307 (Curran Associates, 2017).
 128. Tsvetkova, M. et al. Understanding human–machine networks: a cross-
disciplinary survey. ACM Comput. Surv. 50, 12:1–12:35 (2017).
 129. Hilbert, M., Ahmed, S., Cho, J., Liu, B. & Luu, J. Communicating with 
algorithms: a transfer entropy analysis of emotions-based escapes from 
online echo chambers. Commun. Methods Meas. 12, 260–275 (2018).
 130. Kramer, A. D. I., Guillory, J. E. & Hancock, J. T. Experimental evidence of 
massive-scale emotional contagion through social networks. Proc. Natl Acad. 
Sci. USA 111, 8788–8790 (2014).
 131. Kamar, E., Hacker, S. & Horvitz, E. Combining human and machine intelligence 
in large-scale crowdsourcing. in Proc. 11th International Conference on 
Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems 467–474 (International 
Foundation for Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems, 2012).
 132. Jackson, M. The Human Network: How Your Social Position Determines Your 
Power, Beliefs, and Behaviors (Knopf Doubleday, 2019).
 133. Crandall, J. W. et al. Cooperating with machines. Nat. Commun. 9, 233 (2018). 
 
This study examines algorithmic cooperation with humans and provides an 
example of methods that can be used to study the behaviour of human–
machine hybrid systems.
 134. Wang, D., Khosla, A., Gargeya, R., Irshad, H. & Beck, A. H. Deep learning for 
identifying metastatic breast cancer. Preprint at https://arxiv.org/
abs/1606.05718 (2016).
 135. Pentland, A. Social Physics: How Social Networks Can Make Us Smarter 
(Penguin, 2015).
 136. Lazer, D. et al. Computational social science. Science 323, 721–723 (2009).
 137. Aharony, N., Pan, W., Ip, C., Khayal, I. & Pentland, A. Social fMRI: investigating 
and shaping social mechanisms in the real world. Pervasive Mobile Comput. 7, 
643–659 (2011).
 138. Ledford, H. How to solve the world’s biggest problems. Nature 525, 308–311 
(2015).
 139. Bromham, L., Dinnage, R. & Hua, X. Interdisciplinary research has consistently 
lower funding success. Nature 534, 684–687 (2016).
 140. Kleinberg, J. & Oren, S. Mechanisms for (mis)allocating scientific credit. 
 
In Proc. 43rd Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing 529–538  
(ACM, 2011).
 141. Kannel, W. B. & McGee, D. L. Diabetes and cardiovascular disease. The 
Framingham study. J. Am. Med. Assoc. 241, 2035–2038 (1979).
 142. Krafft, P. M., Macy, M. & Pentland, A. Bots as virtual confederates: design and 
ethics. In Proc. 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work 
and Social Computing 183–190 (ACM, 2017).
 143. Meyer, M. N. Two cheers for corporate experimentation: The A/B illusion 
 
and the virtues of data-driven innovation. Colorado Technol. Law J. 13, 273 
(2015).
 144. Xing, X. et al. Take this personally: pollution attacks on personalized services. 
In Proc. 22nd USENIX Security Symposium 671–686 (2013).
 145. Patel, K. Testing the limits of the First Amendment: how a CFAA prohibition on 
online antidiscrimination testing infringes on protected speech activity. 
Columbia Law Rev. https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3046847 (2017).
Acknowledgements I.R. received funding from the Ethics & Governance 
of Artificial Intelligence Fund; J.B. received funding from NSF awards 
INSPIRE-1344227 and BIGDATA-1447634, DARPA’s Lifelong Learning 
Machines program, ARO contract W911NF-16-1-0304; J.-F.B. from the ANR-
Labex IAST; N.A.C. a Pioneer Grant from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation; 
I.D.C. received funding from the NSF (IOS-1355061), the ONR (N00014-
09-1-1074 and N00014-14-1-0635), the ARO (W911NG-11-1-0385 and 
W911NF14-1-0431), the Struktur- und Innovationsfunds für die Forschung of 
the State of Baden-Württemberg, the Max Planck Society and the DFG Centre 
of Excellence 2117 “Centre for the Advanced Study of Collective Behaviour” 
(422037984); D.L. received funding from the Office of the Director of National 
Intelligence (ODNI), Intelligence Advanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) 
under contract 2017-17061500006; J.B.T. received funding from the Center 
for Brains, Minds and Machines (CBMM) under NSF STC award CCF–1231216; 
M.W. received funding from the Future of Life Institute. The views and 
conclusions contained herein are those of the authors and should not be 
interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or 
implied, of ODNI, IARPA or the US Government.
Reviewer information Nature thanks Thomas Dietterich, Maria Gini, Wendell 
Wallach and the other anonymous reviewer(s) for their contribution to the peer 
review of this work.
Author contributions I.R., M.C. and N.O. conceived the idea, produced the 
figures and drafted the manuscript. All authors contributed content, and refined 
and edited the manuscript.
Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests.
Additional information
Reprints and permissions information is available at http://www.nature.com/
reprints.
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to I.R.
Publisher’s note: Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
© Springer Nature Limited 2019
486 | NATUR e  | v OL 568 | 25 APR i L 2019