

===== PAGE 1 =====
Prompts to layouts: Hybrid graph neural network and agent-based model 
for generative architectural design
Yangpeng Xin , Ying Zhou
*
, Yuanyuan Liu
School of Architecture, Southeast University, Si-Pai-Lou 2, Nanjing, Jiangsu Province 210096, China
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Generative design
Architectural layout
Graph deep learning
Spatial relationship
Agent-based modeling
ABSTRACT
Architects need efficient generative methods for handling complex architectural layout design tasks to spare 
more attention to the aesthetics of buildings. High expertise requirements of the input conditions and the large 
size of datasets bring challenges for architects using generative architectural design methods. This paper presents 
a hybrid model that integrates Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for generating architectural layouts with rational 
topological relationships based on simple prompts and Agent-Based Modeling (ABM) for reducing the dataset size 
of model training. The generated layouts achieve a Structural Similarity (SSIM) of 0.82 with a Graph Edit Dis -
tance (GED) of 1.67 after training on 150 building samples through several testing scenarios. The hybrid model 
generates layouts efficiently and avoids impediments to the model generalizability due to excessive usage costs 
for architects. This paper illuminates how leveraging intelligent algorithms, when enriched with data-driven 
insights, can bridge gaps in collaboration between architects and generative methods.
1. Introduction
Architectural design is a complex task that requires expert knowl -
edge, experience, creativity, and artistic flair [ 1 ]. Designing the scale of 
different spaces, as well as deciding where they should be located, are 
important parts of architectural knowledge and experience [ 2 ]. The 
former relates to the human requirements for area and function, and the 
latter relates to the way of spatial organization, both of which are ar -
chitects' concerns. While these require a great deal of subject expertise, 
intelligent architectural design approaches that generate architectural 
layouts automatically can help human architects speed up the design 
process and pay more attention to artistic work [ 3 ]. With the de -
velopments in computational architecture, significant work has been 
done on automated architectural layout generation. A wide variety of 
algorithms and models for Generative Architectural Design (GAD) have 
been proposed. However, the conditional design of architectural layout 
generation is still an open area of research [ 4 ].
Existing approaches typically use the building boundary and the 
graph-structured bubble diagram as input conditions for layout gener -
ation, while the actual architectural design workflow begins when the 
client presents the architect with requirements that may be continually 
adapted during design interactions [ 5 , 6 ]. Graph-structured inputs and 
building boundaries require a high level of architectural expertise and 
are difficult to form in the early stage of architectural design. Similarly, 
requirements proposed by the client cannot be properly understood and 
translated into a layout with rational spatial relationships, which may 
cause obstacles in the work of the architect [ 7 ]. For GAD, the inability to 
generate effective solutions based on human requirements may cause 
difficulties in the wide implementation of automated layout generation 
methods.
In order to quickly obtain architectural layouts based on the client's 
requirements, some designers use Artificial Intelligence Generated 
Content (AIGC) tools, such as Chat GPT, Mid Journey, and Stable 
Diffusion, to generate layouts by entering prompts [ 8 ]. These tools are 
widely adopted because they cover almost the complete architectural 
design process from receiving requirements to outputting solutions. 
However, these AIGC tools only focus on pixel generation, which hardly 
generates architectural layouts with rational spatial relationships 
[ 9 , 10 ]. In addition, many architects' preferred methods including 
Pix2Pix for generating architectural layouts are data-driven and 
learning-based, which have the advantage of being highly automated. 
However, these methods use intelligent models that need to be trained 
on large amounts of data, which results in the models becoming difficult 
to apply by the designer in real projects and impairs the generalizability 
of the methods. The collection and processing of large datasets can cost 
too much time for architects and reduce their work efficiency, making it 
* Corresponding author.
E-mail address: zhouying@seu.edu.cn (Y. Zhou). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Automation in Construction
journal homep age: www.el sevier.com/l ocate/autcon
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2025.106253
Received 25 November 2024; Received in revised form 28 April 2025; Accepted 1 May 2025  
Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
Available online 5 May 2025 
0926-5805/© 2025 Elsevier B.V. All rights are reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. 

===== PAGE 2 =====
difficult for them to apply these GAD methods to a wide range of 
building types.
This paper proposes a hybrid model integrating graph neural net -
works and agent-based modeling, thereby improving architectural 
layout generation from prompts and having low training costs. This 
automated hybrid model covers more of the architectural design process 
and generates diverse layouts, which increases the efficiency of archi -
tects and designers and inspires their creativity. Compared with existing 
intelligent models for layout generation, the contribution of this 
research is that it realizes the generation of layouts with rational spatial 
relationships based on prompts related to human needs by decon -
structing and simulating human knowledge-driven design workflows 
(see Fig. 1 ). Furthermore, the pre-trained models based on graph neural 
networks can generate diverse results in a short time. Techniques of 
spatial organization are translated into simple rules set up in an agent- 
based model for controlling the movement of rooms to appropriate lo -
cations to generate a layout. The agent-based model integrated into the 
hybrid model does not require complex spatial organization patterns to 
be learned from the data, which reduces the data dependency of the 
method proposed in this study. Therefore, the hybrid model can perform 
well on a limited-size and user-definable dataset due to various appro -
priate sub-models addressing critical issues at different stages of the 
GAD.
Regarding the reporting structure, this study first provides a syn -
thesis of a literature review on intelligent methods for GAD, graph al -
gorithms, and agent-based modeling. Then, the development of the 
hybrid model and its sub-models are illustrated, followed by the results 
of testing scenarios and method evaluation on different residential 
building datasets and an exhibition center dataset. Finally, this study 
concludes with the conclusion section and makes some suggestions for 
future projects.
2. Literature review
2.1. Intelligent methods for GAD
Architects and researchers have never stopped looking for fast, ac -
curate ways to perform generative design to optimize the architectural 
design process. Jacoby [ 11 ] noted that as early as the 19th century, 
Louis Durand summarized the types of buildings and drew up floor 
plans, which provided a database for architectural design and improved 
the efficiency of the architects of that time. However, this approach is 
not intelligent as it simply picks solutions already collected in the 
database. A significant and long-discussed issue is how to generate 
architectural design solutions automatically using intelligent methods 
[ 12 ]. With the development of the arithmetic power of modern com -
puters, it has become possible to translate the experience and knowledge 
of human architects into a simple and intelligent program [ 13 ]. For 
instance, AlOmani and El-Rayes [ 14 ] adopted an image processing 
method integrating two optimization algorithms to generate architec -
tural layouts inspired by natural images and in line with human needs. 
Khalili and Stouffs [ 15 ] used cellular automata to generate high-density 
residential buildings, while Tofighi et al. [ 16 ] used cellular automata to 
design tall-building forms. These cellular automata-based methods have 
good performance in generating 3D forms of buildings. Cubukcuoglu 
et al. [ 17 ] proposed a generative design workflow for three major layout 
planning steps to satisfy multiplex configurational requirements when 
designing a hospital. This intelligent workflow was based on typological 
studies and complex rules, so the layouts generated in their study were 
highly practical. These methods strictly followed the design rules and 
promoted the creativity of architects, but intelligent methods that can 
autonomously learn about the professional architect's knowledge are 
still to be explored.
Deep learning, a type of intelligent method based on feature learning 
[ 8 ], has recently been widely used in GAD due to its powerful ability to 
learn patterns from data. Methods using deep learning can gain expe -
rience and knowledge in architectural design from the dataset used for 
training. Chaillou [ 18 , 19 ] developed an intelligent workflow based on 
Generative Adversarial Neural Networks (GANs), which could generate 
images of layout including furniture according to building footprints. 
The dataset used for training in their study was architectural images, and 
the study skillfully utilized the stylistic translation capabilities of GANs. 
Wu et al. [ 20 ] also proposed a data-driven workflow capable of gener -
ating interior layouts from building footprints. The workflow was based 
on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), and the floor plans gener -
ated by the method got high scores in evaluation by human architects. In 
addition, their study proposed a large-scale dataset, RPLAN, with 
labeled rooms and walls which inspired many subsequent studies. In 
Hanafy's study [ 21 ], three deep learning models from DALL-E 2, Mid 
Journey, and Stable Diffusion platforms were demonstrated and 
compared. This study revealed that these three deep learning models 
from prompts to images could generate realistic images of the built 
environment that inspire architects' imaginations. However, none of the 
three models was able to generate accurate solutions for the task of 
Fig. 1. Comparison between human experience-driven design workflow, existing methods, and proposed method.
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
2 

===== PAGE 3 =====
generating building layouts. The intelligent methods mentioned above 
utilized deep learning to learn the knowledge of human architects from 
image data and showed good performances in mimicking architectural 
layouts in terms of pixels but ignored the interrelationships of archi -
tectural spaces, which can be the key to differentiating the various 
building types. For instance, rooms in a residential building are usually 
laid out around a central room such as a living room or dining room, 
while rooms in an exhibition are usually strung together in a linear 
pattern to make it easier for people to navigate them in sequence. 
Generating neatly aligned pixels but ignoring spatial relationships can 
make the generated layouts out of architectural common sense and 
difficult to use by humans. Ko et al. [ 22 ] noted that architectural layout 
design requires a deep understanding of topological spatial relation -
ships, which remains repetitive and laborious for designers. Therefore, 
algorithms that reflect the relationships of architectural spaces are 
necessary for intelligent methods.
2.2. Graph algorithms in architectural layout generation
Graph theory has been widely adopted in the field of architectural 
design, as professional architects are accustomed to using bubble dia -
grams, a graph-like method of expressing spatial relationships in the 
early stages of design, especially when designing layouts [ 23 ]. Algo -
rithms based on graph theory, such as Space Syntax [ 24 ], Social 
Network Analysis [ 25 ], and Knowledge Graphs [ 26 , 27 ], have been used 
in the design and analysis of architectural layouts as graph algorithms 
have been shown to perform well in understanding spatial relationships 
[ 28 – 30 ] and storing building features [ 31 – 34 ]. Several studies have 
been done to generate architectural layouts using graph algorithms. For 
instance, Hua [ 35 ] presented a method for automatically constructing 
topologically feasible floor plans according to input images, which 
combined subgraph matching and simulated annealing and performed 
well in outputting layouts with reasonable spatial relationships. Aalaei 
et al. [ 4 ] added a graph-based constraint algorithm to the traditional 
image generation method based on GANs, by which this method was 
shown to enhance the architect's control over the topology of the 
generated layouts. Gan [ 36 ] proposed a Building Information Modeling 
(BIM)-based graph data model for the theoretic representation of 
essential characteristics in modular buildings, intending to automate 
and optimize the generative design for modular construction.
When combined with deep learning, the algorithms that enable 
computation using deep neural networks based on the structure of the 
graph are called Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [ 37 ], which have been 
used in architectural layout generation recently. Knechtel et al. [ 38 ] 
proposed an approach based on a Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) 
for the automatic semantic segmentation of floorplan images. Although 
they did not focus on automatically generating layouts, their research 
revealed the potential of GNNs to create associations between graphs 
and layouts. Nauata et al. [ 39 ] developed a novel graph-constrained 
algorithm named House-GAN that employed Convolutional Message 
Passing Neural Networks (Conv-MPN) and GANs. House-GAN could 
generate rational building layouts based on the input graph. Then, 
Nauata et al. [ 40 ] developed their updated algorithm called House- 
GAN ++ , which could generate solutions even comparable to ground- 
truth layouts. Tang et al. [ 41 , 42 ] proposed a graph Transformer-based 
generator, similar to House-GAN ++ , which also works well in gener -
ating layouts with correct spatial relationships. These studies made good 
use of GNNs to automate layout design by training deep learning algo -
rithms to learn architectural knowledge from graph-structured data. 
However, architects are usually confronted with the client's re -
quirements for each room at the beginning of architectural design and 
do not have complex bubble diagrams for generative design. The use of 
intelligent graph algorithms to generate usable architectural graphs 
according to human requirements still deserves to be investigated.
2.3. Agent-based modeling in architectural design
Agent-based modeling (ABM) is a way to model the dynamics of 
complex systems and complex adaptive systems, whose agents receive 
information from the environment and then make decisions and perform 
actions [ 43 ]. A significant application of ABM in the field of architec -
tural design is the evaluation of the built environment [ 44 ]. Liu et al. 
[ 45 ] proposed an ABM approach based on human behavioral rules to 
simulate staff activities and evaluate the hospital environment, which 
illustrated the potential of the ABM in architectural evidence-based 
design. Xin et al. [ 46 ] developed an interactive VR-based workflow in -
tegrated with a Social Force Model (SFM) for the healthcare environ -
ment design evaluation, which showed the flexibility of ABM methods 
like SFM in combining with other digital tools. In these existing studies, 
the agents were the occupants of the buildings.
Another critical application of ABM in the field of architectural 
design is generative design, where the agents of ABM in studies related 
to it are usually the architectural spaces [ 47 ]. Rahbar et al. [ 48 ] 
developed a novel hybrid approach for generating automated 2D 
architectural layouts by combining ABM with the Pix2Pix algorithm, a 
type of GAN. Unlike existing generative design methods using GANs, 
their approach did not use building footprints as training inputs but 
instead generated rational building layouts by training Pix2Pix with 
heat maps generated by a physical force-based ABM. In contrast to 
methods based entirely on the Pix2Pix, their proposed method generates 
layouts that conform to graph structure constraints, since rooms act as 
agents whose movements are guided by the rules of the ABM. In another 
work, Zhang et al. [ 49 ] used ABM enhanced with deep reinforcement 
learning techniques to combine building blocks to automatically 
generate building layouts based on boundary constraints. This approach, 
which adopted ABM, differs from the approach merely based on deep 
learning models, because its spatial organization is determined with the 
rules of ABM, without the need to learn a large number of datasets. 
Besides, they developed a square diffusion algorithm to optimize the 
layouts according to the mutual relations between building blocks, 
which resulted in a more rational layout.
Existing research has demonstrated the applicability of ABM to 
architectural design, especially when combined with deep learning, 
ABM provides a more logical and intelligent approach to GAD. In 
addition, the rules in ABM can replace pre-trained models that could 
only be obtained after extensive training and are architect-definable, 
which distinguishes it from a black-box approach [ 4 ] using a single 
deep-learning algorithm.
2.4. Research gaps
Previous research has made significant contributions to automated 
methods for generating architectural layouts. The importance of spatial 
relationships for topological constraints and the impact of datasets on 
data-driven methods has been emphasized. However, by comparing the 
different methods related to GAD in Table 1 , some research gaps can still 
be identified.
First, it has not been demonstrated how intelligent methods can yield 
different spatial relationships based on various human needs through 
learning from architects' knowledge including spatial organization 
methodology, Gestalt psychology, and space topology [ 50 ]. Existing 
methods, especially learning-based methods, have utilized completed 
graphs or bubble diagrams as inputs to control the topological structure 
for generating layouts yet have neglected the critical procedure of the 
early stages of architectural design, the generation of rational spatial 
relationships from the basic requirements presented by the client, such 
as function and area of spaces, as well as how different spatial re -
lationships are generated when these human needs are changed and 
reorganized.
In addition, how to reduce the size of the necessary dataset to make 
intelligent methods more user-friendly has remained an issue in 
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
3 

===== PAGE 4 =====
previous data-driven research. Although some methods based on the 
Pix2Pix algorithm require less training data, they can easily become 
uninterpretable black-box approaches that produce lower-value solu -
tions [ 4 ] since they only learn how to combine pixels of static images. 
Some existing methods based on GANs and GNNs may reduce the effi -
ciency of architects using such generative design tools due to the large 
amount of training data required to keep the quality of the generated 
layout.
In summary, an intelligent approach needs to be found that generates 
rational architectural layouts based on variable human requirements 
while being easy for architects to use. This research aims to develop an 
intelligent model for generative design that can be trained on a small 
dataset to generate rational and diverse architectural layouts based on 
prompts about clients' requirements, just like a professional architect.
3. Methodology
The typical architectural design workflow generally follows several 
key stages [ 4 ]. First, the architect identifies building constraints based 
on the client's needs, such as the site boundary, spatial functions, room 
quantities, and areas. These constraints are then used to establish spatial 
relationships, often visualized in a bubble diagram. Next, geometric 
shapes are organized based on these relationships, serving as pre -
liminary room outlines. Finally, the architect refines the layout by 
aligning room edges and adding doors or corridors to connect relevant 
spaces. During this process, various design options may be explored for 
comparison, ultimately selecting the optimal solution.
Inspired by this human knowledge-driven workflow, this study de -
velops a hybrid model that mirrors the full design process, with 
specialized sub-models addressing key stages. The model integrates deep 
learning and Agent-Based Modeling (ABM) and can generate multiple 
layout solutions based on simple prompts related to building constraints.
The proposed hybrid model includes three sub-models that corre -
spond to the human-driven design process. First, a GNN-based model 
generates the architectural graph from the provided prompts. Next, ABM 
assembles the room shapes based on the graph's spatial constraints. 
Finally, another GNN-based model adjusts the shapes of individual 
rooms. The following sections detail the model's development and me -
chanics. Residential buildings are the most common building type in the 
construction industry and most of the similar GAD methods have been 
run on residential building datasets, so a residential building layout 
dataset is used as the primary application case to illustrate the hybrid 
model's performance.
3.1. Dataset preparation
The residential building dataset in this study includes 950 residential 
building layouts used for training and validating GNNs and ABM. These 
layouts, sourced from publicly available images of high-rise residential 
buildings, apartments, and villas, were redrawn as vectorized plans in 
Rhinoceros software. Each building has 3 to 17 rooms, with layouts no 
larger than 20 by 20 m. Some statistics about the dataset are presented in 
Fig. 2 . The 950 sample buildings cover 12 room functions, labeled as 
different masks. Through the Rhino plugin Grasshopper, room adja -
cencies were exported as CSV files which consist of the index of start 
nodes, end nodes, and Boolean values indicating the existence of each 
edge. The room features such as room area and function mask, as well as 
the index and sample index were also exported as CSV files through 
Grasshopper (see Fig. 3 ). Before being fed into the mixing model, each 
room in the dataset was given a sequence of values as the room feature 
which contains a unique index mask, an index mask for the sample it 
belongs to, a mask for the spatial function, and a room area. Adjacencies 
between rooms were marked with a Boolean mask, indicating whether 
rooms were interconnected (True) or not (False). Unlike other studies, 
this adjacency only records interconnected rooms, not those merely 
sharing a wall. The dataset was split into training and validation sets. 
The widely used RPLAN dataset was not utilized in this study to ensure 
the proposed hybrid model could be applied to a broader range of 
building types by architects.
3.2. Hybrid model structure design
Fig. 4 illustrates the structure of the hybrid model proposed in this 
study. At first, the function, number, and area of rooms as prompts are 
Table 1 
Comparison of different approaches.
Year Method Category Data source Dataset 
size
Inputs Output
2008 
[ 51 ]
Cellular automata + Evolutionary 
multi-objective optimization
Rule-based 
method
N/A N/A Location of rooms Room tiles in 
existing  
grid
2010 
[ 52 ]
Bayesian network + Metropolis 
algorithm
Learning-based 
algorithm
An extensive catalogue of 
residential layouts
120 Area, footprint, aspect ratio, 
adjacency, adjacency type
Program layout 
(BIM)
2017 
[ 53 ]
ABM + Evolutionary optimization Rule-based 
method
N/A N/A Program graph, area of rooms Layout assigned to 
grid voxel
2019 
[ 19 ]
Pix2Pix Learning-based 
algorithm
Annotated floor plans (raster 
image)
700 + Boundary of building Floor plan image
2020 
[ 54 ]
GNN + Supervised learning Learning-based 
algorithm
RPLAN (raster image) 80,000 Entrance, apartment boundary, 
number/type of rooms
Vectorized layout
2021 
[ 40 ]
Conv-MPN + GAN Learning-based 
algorithm
RPLAN (raster image) 60,000 Program graph Vectorized layout
2021 
[ 55 ]
GANs Learning-based 
algorithm
Emergency department floor plans 
(raster image)
100 + Boundary map Floor plan image
2022 
[ 48 ]
Pix2Pix + ABM Learning-based 
algorithm
Paired image including heatmaps 
and layouts (raster image)
320 Footprint, connectivity graph of 
rooms
Floor plan image
2022 
[ 56 ]
SSIEA algorithm Heuristic search 
strategy
N/A N/A Boundary of building Building massing
2023 
[ 57 ]
GCN + Pix2PixHD Learning-based 
algorithm
Complex architectural and 
structural layouts
300 Image of the 2D architectural 
layout
Graph of structure 
topology
2023 
[ 4 ]
Pix2Pix + Conv-MPN Learning-based 
algorithm
A GNN-friendly dataset 200,000 Boundary of building, bubble 
diagram
Vectorized layout
2023 
[ 58 ]
Bi-RRT, GANs Learning-based 
algorithm
RPLAN (raster image) 80,000 Entrance, boundary of building Vectorized layout
2024 
[ 49 ]
Deep reinforcement learning + ABM Learning-based 
algorithm
Two datasets of frame structure 
buildings
N/A Functional requirements, 
diffusion rates
Vectorized layout
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
4 

===== PAGE 5 =====
Fig. 2. Some statistics of the dataset.
Fig. 3. Dataset preparation workflow.
Fig. 4. Structure of the hybrid model.
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
5 

===== PAGE 6 =====
made into a multidimensional tensor and fed into a graph generation 
model. Next, the graph generation model generates an architectural 
graph based on the tensor that stores the room features. The connections 
of the rooms in the generated architectural graph could also be repre -
sented as an adjacency matrix. A force-directed algorithm (FDA) then 
adjusts the graph to assign an initial coordinate to each room node. The 
graph with the initial coordinates is fed into a deep learning model 
called the seed generation model, which is used to generate initial shape 
parameters for each room. Finally, the agent-based model generates the 
building layout under the human-set rules based on the initial shape 
parameters and the area constraints extracted from the prompts. The 
generation of the layouts through ABM is an iterative process in which 
each step of the generated building layout must be verified for compli -
ance with the generated adjacency matrix. The output architectural 
layout is the final result when the validation result is true.
In summary, the hybrid model proposed in this study consists of 
three key stages implemented by different sub-models: (1) The graph 
generation model generates an architectural graph based on the prompts 
of building features; (2) The seed generation model initializes the pa -
rameters of the rooms based on the architectural graph; (3) The agent- 
based model generates room shapes based on the room parameters 
and topological constraints, and organize spaces to become the archi -
tectural layout. The sub-models are described in detail in the following 
sections in the order of architectural graph generation, ABM, and seed 
generation, with the programs for all models implemented using Python.
3.3. Architectural graph generation
The role of the first sub-model of the hybrid model is to enable the 
architectural graph generation based on simple prompts related to the 
client's requirements. Similar to human architects who draw bubble 
diagrams based on experience and examples, the sub-model learns from 
the architectural graph data to ensure that the generated results have 
reasonable spatial relationships. Therefore, architecture graph genera -
tion is a learning-based process.
3.3.1. Data processing
The architectural graph generation relies on a deep learning model, 
requiring the dataset to be divided into input and output data. The input 
is a tensor of room features. Although the dataset contains two room 
features, function mask and area, feature engineering expands them to 
five metrics: Function Mask (FM), Enhanced Function Mask (EFM), 
Number of Same Functions (NoSF), Index in Same Functions (IiSF), and 
Area Ratio (AR). EFM, the square of FM, emphasizes room function, 
while NoSF and IiSF capture the variability among buildings by indi -
cating the number and index of rooms with the same function. AR 
represents the room's area relative to the total building area. Optimized 
through repeated experiments, these metrics improve model perfor -
mance in generating architectural graphs. The metrics for each room are 
embedded in the adjacency matrix nodes, forming a graph dataset with 
950 subgraphs. The output data is a set of labels for each architectural 
graph edge with a Boolean value indicating its existence.
3.3.2. Graph generation model
The graph generation model based on the GraphSAGE algorithm is 
the key to architectural graph generation. The model transforms struc -
tured prompt data related to architectural features into architectural 
graphs and outputs them as topological constraints for subsequent 
spatial organization. Similar work has been done by Hu et al. [ 54 ]. Their 
proposed Graph2Plan model generates topological constraints accord -
ing to architectural features. The difference is that in their study, the 
spatial relations are generated by retrieving cases that match the input 
features in a huge dataset. In fact, their approach picks potentially 
suitable solutions in the database and does not generate new solutions. 
Instead, the proposed graph generation model learns the information in 
a small dataset and generates spatial relationships that are unique and 
consistent with human experience and knowledge.
As the workflow shown in Fig. 5 , the model enables the generation of 
the architectural graph based on prompts. In the training phase of the 
model, the graph dataset extracted from the ground truth is decomposed 
into node features representing room features and edge labels repre -
senting room connections. GraphSAGE operates on neighboring node 
features centered on each node and generates a new node representation 
for each node through the aggregation function. Specifically, for node v , 
the local aggregation method can be expressed as follows (1). In this 
algorithm, h
( k )
N ( v )
is the local representation of all neighboring nodes of 
node v at the layer k , while AGGREGATE is the aggregation function at 
the layer k , which is taken to be mean in this study. The edges of a graph 
are represented as a pair of nodes u and v , whose nodes are denoted as 
h
( L )
u 
and h
( L )
v
, as computed by GraphSAGE (2). In this study, the score for 
the probability of the connection between nodes u and v is denoted as 
y
n , v
. 
h
( k )
N ( v )
= AGGREGAT E
( k )
(
h
( k   1 )
u
| u ϵ N ( v )
)
(1) 
Fig. 5. Graph generation workflow.
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
6 

===== PAGE 7 =====
y
n , v
= Φ
(
h
( L )
u
, h
( L )
v
)
(2) 
The probability distribution of a connection is from 0 to 1 and the 
existence state of an edge is True or False, so the graph generation model 
needs to deal with a binary classification problem. The loss function of 
the model was chosen to be Binary Cross-Entropy Loss (BEC Loss) 
because of its ability to guarantee both positive and negative prediction 
accuracies in binary classification tasks. Its equation is shown in (3), 
where N is the number of samples, y
k
is the label (0 or 1) of the sample k 
from the dataset, and ̂y
k
is the predicted probability of the sample k . In 
this study, the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) curve and Area 
Under the Curve (AUC) were employed to evaluate the performance of 
the pre-trained graph generation models in handling the binary classi -
fication task. When the ROC curve is near the upper left corner and the 
AUC is close to 1, it indicates that the model possesses a good ability to 
classify the edges of the graph [ 59 ]. 
BCELOSS ( y , ̂y ) =  
1
N
∑
N
k = 1
[ y
k
log ( ̂y
k
) + ( 1   y
k
) log ( 1   ̂y
k
) ] (3) 
Inspired by the study by Zhao et al. [ 60 ], the architectural graph 
generation model implements link prediction based on node features. 
During testing, prompts suggested by the client were extracted to pro -
duce room features and a graph of all the interconnected rooms. Similar 
to the training process, room features are embedded into the nodes and a 
trained graph generation model is used to generate the probabilities of 
connection between every two rooms. After filtering the probabilities, 
the retained connections are integrated into the architectural graph 
along with the room features.
3.4. Agent-based modeling
The previous section explained the generation of the architectural 
graph, but the room shape has yet to be addressed. Therefore, the second 
sub-model has adopted an agent-based model that allows room geom -
etries to be generated inspired by parameters. In addition, the algo -
rithms of this sub-model used simple rules to organize the room 
geometries into an architectural layout that conforms to the generated 
graph.
3.4.1. Data processing
To generate rooms for ABM, the dataset must be further processed to 
create an initial parameter tensor, referred to as the “ seed. ” This study 
backtracked the building footprints of sample layouts to extract their 
seeds. These footprints were mapped onto a 0.1-m grid, with all 
operations based on grid cells (see Fig. 6 ). The centroid of each room 
footprint was designated as the seed core, and its coordinates were 
recorded. Room footprints were inwardly offset until a minimum 3-by-3 
cell area remained as the seed. Room generation was carried out on a 
200-by-200 grid, with the seed core of the most connected room in each 
building set as the origin. The seeds' height (h), width (w), and core 
coordinates (x, y) were then integrated into the dataset. These data 
processing processes were automated by the Grasshopper program 
coded by the researchers.
3.4.2. Rules for the agent-based model
The agents in the proposed ABM act as the seed of each room to 
generate room shapes in a layout. The ABM-based room generation 
process works in reverse to data processing, with each seed expanding 
outward into a room with a defined shape. During each ABM round, the 
seed grows one layer, resembling growth rings shown in Fig. 6 . Similar 
to Inoue and Takagi's work [ 51 ], specific rules are applied in this agent- 
based model to manage how shapes interact when they come into con -
tact, but with some critical differences. As shown in Fig. 7 , the model 
requires inputs like room seed size, coordinates, and area. Each room 
generation round involves traversing the grid cells, with each cell's 
behavior governed by three rules based on the states of neighboring cells 
from the previous round.
The room generation algorithm in ABM uses a 3-by-3 convolutional 
kernel. Rule 1, similar to cellular automata, activates a cell when 
neighboring live cells are present in the kernel, allowing the room to 
grow layer by layer. Rule 2 distinguishes between different rooms, with 
each room assigned a distinct color based on the majority of neighboring 
cells. Rooms stop growing when the number of cells occupied by each 
color matches the corresponding input area for that room. Rule 3 gen -
erates walls around the exterior of rooms once their growth is complete. 
In addition, each round of room generation outputs a room adjacency 
matrix for representing room connections.
Fig. 8 shows the architectural layouts containing room shapes and 
walls generated by the room generation algorithm when the coordinates 
of the seeds are the same as the ground truth in the dataset. The 
generated layouts have a high degree of similarity in shape and size 
compared to the ground truth, and even some irregular rooms could be 
generated, which proves that the room generation algorithm has been 
able to generate reasonable room shapes using seeds with appropriate 
sizes. In four of the five cases shown in Fig. 8 , the adjacency matrix (B) of 
the generated layouts belongs exactly to the adjacency matrix (A) of the 
ground truth. The complexity of the case e with a large number of rooms 
leads to the fact that some of the rooms in the generated layout cannot be 
connected under the guide of the previous rules. Therefore, a movement 
algorithm needs to be added to the agent-based model to ensure that the 
generated layouts have rational spatial relationships.
In ABM, the seed (or agent) moves based on matrix A to find 
appropriate neighbors until matrix B fully contains matrix A. As shown 
in Fig. 9 , several rules guide the agent movement. According to the 
target matrix A, the agent with the most adjacencies is always stationary 
and is anchored to the center of the grid, which improves the efficiency 
of the algorithm. The current agent position is used as the seed co -
ordinates in the room generation algorithm to compute matrix B. When 
B cannot contain A, the agent in the room that failed to connect suc -
cessfully moves two cells toward the agent in the target room (see lines 
27 – 40 in Fig. 9 ). Rooms stop moving once all adjacencies are satisfied. 
An optimization rule prevents agents from moving into crowded dead 
ends, which would cause the algorithm to fail in generating the correct 
room area (see lines 13 – 21 in Fig. 9 ). If an agent lacks enough space to 
grow room shape, it immediately relocates symmetrically to its initial 
position, using the grid center as the axis of symmetry.
3.5. Seed generation for the agent-based model
The rule-based ABM generates room shapes from seeds and 
Fig. 6. Room features in data processing for the agent-based model.
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
7 

===== PAGE 8 =====
assembles them into a coherent layout, highlighting the seed's signifi -
cance in this method. However, an intelligent sub-model is needed to 
automate seed generation. The seeds generated by this sub-model need 
to grow into the appropriate shapes and harmonize with the shapes of 
the surrounding rooms. Calculating the parameters of the seed is a 
complex process that requires consideration of the neighborhoods be -
tween the seeds. Therefore, seed generation is also implemented by a 
kind of graph neural network.
3.5.1. Data processing
Before ABM, the only available data for this sub-model is the archi -
tectural graph from the graph generation model. The graph layout ob -
tained from the floor plan depends on the shape of the room, while it is 
similar to the layout graph generated by the FDA (see Fig. 10 ). In the 
process of spatial organization, similar graph layouts indicate that the 
spaces have similar movement trends, so there could be an association 
between the graph layout generated by the FDA and the room shapes, 
which can be used for inspiring the room seed generation. As shown in 
Fig. 10 , a unit vector was created between each room centroid and the 
centroid of the room with the most adjacencies. The FDA produces a 
graph layout where most unit vectors align with those in the actual floor 
plan. In cases b and c, a few unit vectors are reversed compared to the 
floor plan, but this has minimal impact on layout generation since the 
seeds could adjust their positions through ABM.
Therefore, the dataset was further processed in this study as input 
data from the graph layout for the method of room seed generation. 
Specifically, the unit vectors of individual rooms extracted from the 
floor plan of the sample will be embedded as tensors in the graph node of 
the dataset.
3.5.2. Seed generation model
As Klüpfel points out, the ABM with AI has the highest interaction 
and autonomy, followed by the rule-based ABM [ 61 ]. Therefore, a sub- 
model based on graph deep learning was used in this study for seed 
generation to enhance the intelligence of the proposed ABM. First, the 
graph generated by the graph generation model is processed by the FDA 
to become a graph layout. This study used the ‘spring_layout ’ function 
from Python's NetworkX package, a force-directed algorithm, to 
generate graph layouts. The algorithm applies forces to graph nodes, 
using attraction between connected nodes and repulsion between un -
connected ones [ 62 , 63 ]. When applied to the initial layout of room 
seeds, this method increases the probability of neighboring rooms that 
should be connected. The graph is then mapped onto a grid in the ABM, 
where each node's unit vector is decomposed into orthogonal x and y 
components and fed into the seed generation model.
As shown in Fig. 11 , the proposed seed generation model employs a 
two-layer GCN. The data used for training consists of the unit vectors 
extracted from the floor plan and the seed size (height and width) for 
each room. The seed generation model is a GCN-based graph node 
regression model for generating two parameters based on the input 
graph and the unit vectors as the node features. Similar to GraphSAGE, 
GCN can perform deep learning on graph structures, but unlike 
GraphSAGE which samples partial nodes [ 64 ], GCN focuses more on the 
complete graph structure with all nodes [ 65 ] and is more suitable for 
generating space-relevant seeds in this model. The following Eqs. (4), (5) 
describe the GCN algorithm. In this equation, A is the adjacency matrix, 
while 
̂
A is the adjacency matrix with the addition of a unit matrix I . H
( k )
as the input feature is the feature representation of the unit vector of the 
room. 
̂
D is a degree matrix and W
( k )
is the network parameter. σ is the 
activation function, which is ReLu in this study. The function f repre -
sents the output at layer k and also serves as the input H
( k + 1 )
to the next 
layer. 
f
 
H
( k )
, A
)
= σ
⎛
⎝ ̂
D
 
1
2
̂
A
̂
D
 
1
2
H
( k )
W
( k )
⎞
⎠
(4) 
Fig. 7. Rules for room generation.
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
8 

===== PAGE 9 =====
̂
A = A + I
(5) 
MSELOSS =
1
n
∑
n
i = 1
( y
i
1   y
i
2 )
2
(6) 
Eq. (6) demonstrates the Mean Squared Error Loss (MSE Loss) used 
for this model, which is a loss function performing well in regression 
tasks. y
i
1 is the real value of sample i from the dataset and y
i
2 is the 
predicted value. n denotes the sample size, which is 150 in this study. 
Since MSE Loss is used to optimize the model by comparing the mean 
square error of the predicted and true values, it is also used as a metric 
for evaluating the pre-trained models in this stage. A smaller MSE means 
that the model predicts values closer to the true values.
Each graph node in this model represents a seed or agent in the ABM, 
so the two parameters output by the trained model are the values of the 
height and width of the seed, which are used to inspire the growth of the 
room shape in the ABM. In addition, the coordinates of the nodes on the 
graph layout on the grid serve as the initial positions of the seeds in the 
ABM. At this point, the agent-based model has all the necessary seed 
parameters to generate a reasonable architectural layout.
3.6. Implementation details and evaluation metrics
The hybrid model proposed in this study was implemented in 
generative design to test its ability to generate effective building layouts 
with different prompts as inputs. In addition, the usability of the hybrid 
model in architectural design workflows was illustrated through 
generative design. Generative design in this study is the process by 
which the proposed hybrid model generates multiple architectural lay -
outs based on human needs. The generative design workflow is shown in 
Fig. 12 . Professional architects entered the client's requirements for 
function and area as prompts in the hybrid model, which generates the 
architectural layouts. Then architects fine-tuned their architectural 
layouts and drew them as floor plans. The optimal solution could be 
singled out, deepened in Rhino, and created as a 3D building model. The 
rules of the ABM guide the movement of the rooms, so all randomly 
generated layouts are fully compliant with the topological constraints 
and the area required by the prompts. The decision to pick the optimal 
layout depends entirely on the aesthetic preferences of the architect. In 
this workflow, the architects could pay more attention to the exterior 
design of the buildings. Referring to similar GAD studies [ 12 , 27 ], this 
study openly recruited 15 architectural experts to participate in gener -
ative design. By the end of the recruitment period, 17 qualified archi -
tectural experts were recruited, 5 of whom personally used the hybrid 
model to complete the GAD for the residential building and the exhi -
bition center. All participants qualified as professional architects.
Different scenarios of architectural design tasks, inspired by prompts 
about room function and area, were used to test the performance of this 
hybrid model on residential building datasets and an exhibition center 
dataset. The proposed hybrid model was first tested on several resi -
dential building datasets with different numbers of samples to identify 
the minimum necessary dataset size on which to train the model. Then a 
generative design involving five professional architects was imple -
mented based on a minimum residential building dataset, followed by 
the evaluation of the generated results by 17 participants. In this phase, 
Fig. 8. Outputs of the room generation.
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
9 

===== PAGE 10 =====
Fig. 9. Movement algorithm for the agent-based model.
Fig. 10. Graph layouts by force-directed algorithm compared with floor plans.
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
10 

===== PAGE 11 =====
the type of residential building selected as the sample of the dataset can 
facilitate the comparison of this study with similar GAD studies.
The hybrid model was also implemented on an exhibition center 
dataset to demonstrate the generalizability of the model based on a mini- 
sized dataset. As a large public building type, exhibition centers differ 
greatly from residential buildings in function, scale, and topology. 
Therefore, using the exhibition center as the object of generative design 
in this phase can effectively test the generalizability of this hybrid 
model. This is a complementary demonstration to prove that hybrid 
models can still work effectively on larger-scale building types.
For the implementation of the hybrid model, Python 3.8.18 and 
PyTorch 2.2.1 were utilized, and all GADs were run in an NVIDIA 
GeForce RTX 4080 with 16 GB memory. All models and algorithms were 
programmed, integrated, and successfully run in Jupyter Notebook. All 
Fig. 11. Seed generation model.
Fig. 12. Generative design workflow using the hybrid model.
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
11 

===== PAGE 12 =====
of the residential building datasets used to train the graph generation 
model and the seed generation model with all data that require manual 
labeling were prepared in seven days by two researchers, while the 
exhibition center dataset was prepared by two researchers in five days.
3.6.1. Implementation on residential building datasets
This study has employed five scenarios inspired by prompts about 
building constraints to test the efficacy of the hybrid model and its sub- 
models for the generative design of residential buildings. The 950 resi -
dential building samples were divided into five datasets of different sizes 
and were used for training and validation to identify the minimum 
dataset size for the hybrid model. Five professional architects came up 
with several prompts related to five residential building scenarios and 
they used the proposed hybrid model trained on the minimum resi -
dential building dataset to complete the GAD. Then the outcomes of the 
testing scenarios were evaluated in terms of realism, diversity, and 
compatibility. The realism was scored on a Likert scale by a team of 17 
participants with professional architectural knowledge.
The diversity of the outcome was measured using Structural Simi -
larity (SSIM), a measure of the similarity of two images in terms of three 
parameters: brightness, contrast, and structural information [ 66 – 68 ]. 
When the weights of the three parameters are the same, the equation of 
SSIM is shown in (7). μ
x 
and μ
y 
are the average brightness of images x 
and y , respectively. σ
x 
and σ
y 
are the standard deviation of the two 
images, and σ
xy 
is the covariance. The generated layouts of testing sce -
narios were converted to images and paired with each other, and their 
SSIM was calculated. SSIM scores usually range from 0 to 1, and the 
lower SSIM indicates a greater diversity between the two layouts. 
SSIM ( x , y ) =
(
2 μ
x
μ
y
+ C
1
)
+
 
2 σ
xy
+ C
2
)
(
μ
2
x
+ μ
2
y
+ C
1
)(
σ
2
x
+ σ
2
y
+ C
2
) (7) 
The compatibility was assessed by computing the Graph Edit Dis -
tance (GED) [ 69 ] between the architectural graph generated by the 
graph generation model and the final graph output from ABM. The GED 
score has been adopted as a standard metric in several GAD research 
[ 27 , 39 , 40 ]. A lower GED score indicates a greater topological similarity 
between the two graph structures.
In the evaluation of the generative design of residential buildings, 
the proposed hybrid model, as an artifact, has been evaluated by the 
team based on the metrics of effectiveness, efficiency, usability, and 
flexibility [ 70 ]. The evaluation of the model was accomplished through 
a survey that also used a Likert scale.
3.6.2. Implementation on the exhibition center dataset
This study has also employed five scenarios inspired by prompts to 
test the performance of the hybrid model for the generative design of the 
exhibition center. Five professional architects came up with several 
prompts related to five exhibition center scenarios and they used the 
proposed hybrid model trained on the minimum dataset to complete the 
GAD. This study analyzes the training performance and generalizability 
of the hybrid model when used for different building types by comparing 
the GAD results for residential buildings and exhibition centers.
4. Results
The datasets have been utilized to test and evaluate the efficiency of 
the hybrid model for GAD. For the learning-based graph generation 
model and seed generation model, several datasets with different resi -
dential building samples were used for model training and identifying 
the models' necessary data size. The outputs of the agent-based model 
when given seed parameters have been presented in Fig. 8 . For seed 
parameters related to brand-new prompts, the outputs of the agent- 
based model have been demonstrated through the final results of the 
generative design. The following specifically shows the training results 
of the learning-based sub-models of this hybrid model, the results of the 
final generative design, and the evaluation of the proposed generative 
method by 17 architectural experts.
4.1. Graph generation
As shown in Table 2 , the 950 residential building samples were 
randomly sampled and divided into five different-sized datasets con -
taining train and validation sets. The largest dataset set in this study 
contains 800 training samples and 150 validation samples. In the other 
datasets, the size of the training set decreases to 100. The validation set 
is the same in all datasets except dataset 1, where 50 samples were 
randomly deleted from the validation set in order to avoid the validation 
set size exceeding the train set. When trained on each dataset, the graph 
generation model was trained over 1000 epochs and simultaneously 
validated on a validation set that did not intersect with the training set. 
The Adam optimizer was used to adjust and update the model's pa -
rameters based on losses with a learning rate of 0.001. By comparing the 
AUC of the pre-trained models on different datasets, it is found that the 
training AUC of the models with train sets of 800, 600, 300, and 150 all 
exceeds 0.80 and the validation AUC is around 0.70, the difference is not 
significant. However, when the size of the training set is 100, the 
training AUC decreases to 0.72, while the validation AUC decreases to 
only 0.60, which performs worse than the other sizes of datasets in this 
study. The detailed visualization of the training results of the graph 
generation model on different datasets is shown in Appendix Fig. 1 . 
Considering that smaller training datasets mean that architects can 
spend less effort processing the data, 150 samples as training data may 
be sufficient for the graph generation model. As illustrated in (a) in 
Fig. 13 , the model performs well on the dataset with 150 train samples 
and 150 validation samples, and the loss of both gradually decreases and 
converges around 0.5. Both the training and validation ROC curves of 
the model are significantly closer to the upper left corner with AUC 
values of 0.85 and 0.70 (see chart b in Fig. 13 ), which indicates that the 
model has the ability to both pick out correct spatial relationships and 
exclude incorrect ones.
The training results only show that 150 training samples may be 
sufficient for the training of the graph generation model, however, the 
generated results still need to be analyzed to determine the appropriate 
dataset size. According to the prompts proposed by professional archi -
tects, the pre-trained models on five different datasets generated spatial 
relationships which were represented as graph layouts, like the bubble 
diagrams used by architects. Fig. 14 shows the prompts proposed by the 
architects for different scenarios and the generated graphs labeled with 
normalized existence probabilities on edges and compared the gener -
ated graph from different-sized datasets. The architects believed that the 
generated graphs had reasonable spatial relationships when the training 
samples reached 150. In generated layouts generated from datasets 2, 3, 
4, and 5, the living room, as the center of the building, has the most 
neighboring rooms. The living and dining rooms are interconnected as 
public spaces. In addition, the bedrooms serve as private spaces that are 
not interconnected. From an architectural point of view, the models 
trained on datasets 2 and 4 perform better because they generate graphs 
with a more concise topology. This is also in line with the model training 
results revealed in Table 2 . The generated graphs for models trained on 
Table 2 
Performance of graph generation models on different-sized datasets.
Dataset Dataset size Training epoch AUC
Train set Validation set Training Validation
1 800 150 1000 0.84 0.73
2 600 150 1000 0.85 0.73
3 300 150 1000 0.82 0.66
4 150 150 1000 0.85 0.70
5 100 100 1000 0.72 0.60
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
12 

===== PAGE 13 =====
Fig. 13. Performance of the graph generation model on 150-sample training data.
Fig. 14. Results of the graph generation model on different datasets.
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
13 

===== PAGE 14 =====
dataset 5 are not concise enough or even topologically incomplete, 
suggesting that datasets smaller than 150 could not be sufficient for 
hybrid models.
4.2. Seed generation
The seed generation model was also pre-trained on five different 
datasets shown in Table 2 . The model on each dataset was trained over 
200 epochs while validation was performed. The Adam optimizer was 
used for training with a learning rate of 0.01. This study has evaluated 
the performance of the model by comparing the training and validation 
loss curves. The detailed training results of the seed generation model on 
different datasets in Appendix Fig. 2 illustrates that the seed generation 
model performs well on datasets of different sizes and are all very close. 
Therefore, the training set containing 150 samples is still sufficient for 
the seed generation model. As shown in Fig. 15 , the training loss and the 
validation loss on 150 samples gradually decrease and stabilize to 0. 
Both loss curves show a good fit up to 200 epochs, indicating that the 
model performs well on both the training and validation sets. Consid -
ering that the seed generation model employs MSE Loss, the loss curves 
close to 0 could reveal that the model could successfully learn the fea -
tures of the room parameters from the training data. The validity of the 
room parameters generated by the model will be evaluated in the 
generative design test.
4.3. Generative design using the hybrid model
4.3.1. Design of the residential building
The size of the dataset used in this generative design was 150 as 
identified in the previous section. As shown in Fig. 16 , the hybrid model 
has generated a variety of satisfactory results from different prompts. All 
the spaces in the generated layouts of all the scenarios have been 
rationally organized and they have the right size and shape. In Scenario 
R-1, although the three generated layouts with only five rooms are 
similar, no rooms are too narrow to be used. Those rooms that are 
similar in size have similar lengths of their shared walls. In those com -
plex scenarios with more prompts, the generated architectural layouts 
are more diverse, which is quite evident in R-4 and R-5. In most of the 
generated layouts, the walls of neighboring rooms have been kept as 
aligned as possible, indicating that seed generation in the hybrid model 
was effective. Specifically, the hybrid model has learned from the 
experience and knowledge of human architects that the edges of 
neighboring rooms need to be aligned to satisfy Gestalt psychology [ 50 ]. 
In addition, there is enough space to place doors between the linked 
rooms, indicating that the movement algorithm in ABM effectively 
organized the rooms based on the spatial relationships from the gener -
ated graph. Although some of the generated layouts are not perfect, with 
the edges of some rooms still not being aligned and some room footprints 
having sharp corners, producing the current results is acceptable given 
that the train set has only 150 samples.
A survey was designed to evaluate the realism of results, adopting a 
Likert scale ranging from 0 (Poor) to 10 (Excellent). The survey sought 
feedback from a total of seventeen participants. As shown in Fig. 17 (a), 
the average score of realism of the testing scenarios is 6.48, indicating 
that the generated layouts have met users' design requirements. The 
average SSIM score for the five scenarios is 0.82. Generally, a lower 
SSIM score is better, as it denotes smaller differences between the sets of 
images being compared. Considering that all layout images have the 
same brightness and contrast, this score suggests a good diversity of 
multiple results in terms of structural information [ 67 , 68 ]. Similarly, a 
lower GED score is desirable, representing a greater topological simi -
larity between graphs. In this case, the average GED score for the hybrid 
model is 1.67, which improves upon the House-GAN ++ model's average 
GED score of 2.6 in a similar study [ 40 ]. This better score reveals that the 
ABM in this study has a more stable performance constraining the to -
pology of the spaces based on graph structure data compared to GANs.
The user satisfaction scores through the 11-level Likert scale for the 
hybrid model are shown in Fig. 17 (b). When this hybrid model was used 
in a design workflow by professional architects, it reached mean scores 
of 7 for effectiveness, efficiency, usability, and flexibility. Most of the 
seventeen evaluation participants believed that this automated genera -
tive design model could generate appropriate layouts to improve their 
work efficiency. And the simple process, from prompts to layouts, makes 
it easy for users to grasp this intelligent approach. In addition, the 
evaluation team thought that the sub-models of the model had good 
potential to be upgraded in the future, allowing for good flexibility in the 
hybrid model. The average score of the hybrid model on learning 
capability was close to 8, indicating that humans with architectural 
knowledge believed that the hybrid model learned valid human expe -
rience from the data. What is interesting is that evaluation participants 
noted some design flaws which were also learned by the hybrid model 
due to the inclusion of older residential buildings in the dataset. For 
instance, in some results, bedrooms may be noisy because of the prox -
imity to the kitchen, and some bedrooms are in poorly lighted locations. 
The average score for the training dataset reached 7. Although some 
participants felt that the size of the dataset used for the testing scenarios 
complicated the design process, the majority concurred that the hybrid 
model performed satisfactorily with the necessary 150 sample buildings 
Fig. 15. Training and validation loss of seed generation model on 150-sample training data.
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
14 

===== PAGE 15 =====
for training. According to the evaluation results and Simon's criteria 
[ 71 ], the proposed hybrid model is an artifact that could meet the users' 
satisfaction.
4.3.2. Design of the exhibition center
A dataset consisting of 300 exhibition center buildings (150 for the 
train set and 150 for the validation set) including galleries, museums, art 
centers, and exhibition halls has been used to train the hybrid model, 
which has been tested to check if the hybrid model has good general -
izability with minimal training data. Charts (a) and (b) in Fig. 18 depict 
the statistics for the exhibition center dataset that significantly differ 
from the residential building dataset. As a type of large public building, 
an exhibition center usually consists of more rooms and has a larger 
area. Chart (c) and (b) in Fig. 18 show the performance of the graph 
generation model and the seed generation model trained on a dataset of 
150 exhibition centers. The graph generation model achieves a training 
AUC of 0.80 and a validation AUC of 0.70, both of which are close to the 
performance on the residential building dataset. The performance of the 
seed generation model trained on the exhibition center dataset is also 
close to the performance on residential building dataset. However, 
whether the hybrid model is also suitable for large public buildings such 
as exhibition centers still needs to be judged by the results of the 
generative design.
Five professional architects used the hybrid model for the generative 
Fig. 16. Generated layouts of the residential building and fine-tuned results.
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
15 

===== PAGE 16 =====
Fig. 17. Evaluation of testing scenarios and the hybrid model.
Fig. 18. Statistics and training results of the exhibition center samples.
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
16 

===== PAGE 17 =====
design of the exhibition center, and the results of their five scenarios are 
shown in Fig. 19 and Fig. 20 . The number of prompts gradually in -
creases from scene E-1 to E-3. It is worth noting that three architects 
proposed the same prompts (E-3 in Fig. 19 and Fig. 20 ) to conduct 
generative design to discuss whether the hybrid model still has diversity 
when used in large public buildings.
The graph layouts generated by the hybrid model based on the 
prompts were reasonable in all five scenarios. Specifically, the generated 
graphs all formed the circulation type suitable for the exhibition center. 
The connections between several different exhibitions are linear, which 
is consistent with the common sense of the exhibition center. In addi -
tion, some auxiliary rooms, such as lounges and toilets, are connected to 
the main circulation and become attached to the exhibitions, which is in 
line with the common sense of architectural design. The five architects 
believe that the hybrid model has learned the topological characteristics 
of the exhibition center, which are quite different from those of resi -
dential buildings. Since some of the buildings in the training data had 
multiple floors, the hybrid model generated multi-floor solutions for 
scenarios E-2 and E-3 (b). In those multi-floor solutions, the graphs are 
still concise and logical, and the circulation lines on each floor make 
sense. The ABM and the seed generation model provide appropriately 
shaped rooms for generated layouts. In a simple scenario like E-1, the 
rooms are rationally organized so that the edges of the entire layout 
conform to Gestalt psychology. In all scenarios, exhibitions of similar 
size also have similar shapes, which is in line with the human experience 
of an exhibition center. Although (a) and (c) of Scenario E-3 are based on 
the same prompts and have the same graph, their generated architec -
tural layouts are completely different. The SSIM for (a) and (c) in Sce -
nario E-3 is 0.68, which shows the high diversity of the generated 
layouts in this scenario. Regarding compatibility, the hybrid model has 
an average GED score of 5.8 in the five exhibition center scenarios, 
which is higher than the score in the residential scenario. The larger 
number of rooms may be responsible for the decreased compatibility of 
the hybrid model on the large public building dataset compared to its 
performance on the residential building dataset, but this result is still 
acceptable. The ABM ensures that the spatial organization conforms to 
the graphic structure so that each room finds its proper place, which 
eliminates the need for the architect to examine the adjacency matrix of 
the layout during the fine-tuning process. The problems that appeared in 
the generative design of residential buildings still remain in the gener -
ative design of exhibition centers. For example, the generated layout still 
has some rooms with narrow corners. However, the hybrid model has 
successfully learned the topological type and the geometry of exhibition 
centers, which are the critical characteristics that distinguish exhibition 
centers from residential buildings. Considering that the training set used 
in the generative design has only 150 samples, the layout generated by 
Fig. 19. Generated layouts of the exhibition center and fine-tuned results.
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
17 

===== PAGE 18 =====
the hybrid model is acceptable.
5. Discussion
5.1. Integration of learning-based GNNs and rule-based ABM
This study makes contributions in the case of integrating learning- 
based models with the rule-based approach. One of the critical contri -
butions of the study is to translate human requirements like function and 
area into rational spatial relationships as the constraint of architectural 
layout generation, which differs from previous works in certain ways. In 
GAD, previous GNN-related studies focused on using graph algorithms 
in room shape generation to constrain the topological relationships of 
the generated results. These studies elegantly solved the problem of 
generating geometries in line with spatial relationships, making the 
generated architectural layouts rational [ 4 , 39 , 72 , 73 ]. However, how 
spatial relationships are generated based on the client's basic needs 
remained unaddressed, resulting in the failure of existing automated 
methods to cover the early stages of architectural design. The lack of 
methods for generating spatial relationships from simple prompts has 
led to previous methods requiring high levels of user knowledge and 
experience in architecture. In contrast to methods in past research, 
GNNs as the learning-based models in this study have been applied in a 
way that works not only with topological constraints but also with to -
pology generation and geometry generation. This allows the automated 
approach to cover more architectural design workflow with better us -
ability. The hybrid model generates multiple architectural layouts 
directly from the input prompts, and the entire process takes only a few 
minutes, greatly improving the user's design efficiency. Meanwhile, the 
human design experience in the data features has been acquired by the 
GNNs, making the generated layouts rational. Not only was the design 
knowledge of the adjacencies of spaces acquired but also how spaces, 
especially neighboring rooms, are generated was also acquired by the 
GNN.
Moreover, this paper introduced a rule-based ABM for spatial orga -
nization and topological constraints, which is another difference from 
previous studies. For instance, the rules adopted by ABM involve the 
growth and movement of spaces, both simultaneously rather than in 
isolation. Each space thus has a unique behavior that resembles the 
design behaviors of human architects and does not require learning from 
the data. Therefore, less training data could be necessary for this hybrid 
model to realize spatial organization compared to an entirely learning- 
Fig. 20. Generated layouts of the exhibition center and fine-tuned results (continued).
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
18 

===== PAGE 19 =====
based model. By comparing the performance of tests on datasets of 
different sizes, it is demonstrated that 150 training samples enable the 
hybrid model to generate effective architectural layouts. Efficiently 
constraining the output is another advantage of rule-based ABM. For 
instance, each step of the computation in the agent-based model verifies 
that the topological relationship of the generated layout conforms to the 
architectural graph output by the GNN. The results in the testing sce -
narios of residential buildings demonstrate the greater similarity be -
tween the layouts output by ABM and the input topological constraints 
compared to existing models. In the generative design of residential 
buildings, the compatibility of the generated results is 1.67 and less than 
2.60 in similar studies, which indicates a better performance of the 
hybrid model. According to certain studies, room area is one of the 
critical requirements that the users can change [ 52 , 74 ]. Rule-based ABM 
enables the transfer of areas of different spaces as constraint information 
in the hybrid model. Thus, compared to some pixel-based deep learning 
models in which the generated spatial areas are not user-definable, this 
hybrid model generates layouts with correct areas that perfectly match 
the user's needs.
5.2. Deconstruction and facilitation of the human-led design workflow
Learning-based approaches have been widely used in automated 
GAD because their most significant advantage is the ability to learn from 
data about human knowledge and quickly provide solutions given pre -
defined conditions [4] . However, these approaches for generating 
effective layouts rely on high-quality datasets, both in terms of quantity 
and quality [ 75 ]. This data dependency makes it difficult for automated 
generative design to be applied to a wider range of building types, 
especially those where data collection is difficult, such as hospitals and 
airports [ 73 ]. Learning spatial organization and geometry generation 
consumes too much data and may be unnecessary. The human experi -
ence contained in the data of associating spatial relationships with cli -
ents' requirements may change as society evolves, which is critical but 
has been ignored by many previous studies.
This study deconstructs the human knowledge-driven architectural 
design workflow into three major stages and simulates these stages with 
multiple computational design methods. Replacing human-led design 
processes with appropriate models including those learning-based and 
rule-based can reduce data dependency, which increases the potential 
for this hybrid model to be used for a wide range of building types. 
Although some previous studies have accomplished similar works [ 48 ], 
the hybrid model proposed in this study differs by covering a wider 
range of architectural design workflows. Benefiting from the ability of 
GNNs to establish associations between data and topology, the hybrid 
model starts running as soon as it accepts the prompts proposed by the 
user and then outputs multiple layouts directly. According to certain 
studies, GNNs can understand and embed diverse architectural features 
including carbon reduction potential [ 72 ], so this hybrid model can 
break through the limitations of the dataset in this study and generate 
layouts based on more diverse prompts.
5.3. Advantages, limitations and implications
Datasets have been a challenge for learning-based models, especially 
deep learning models in GAD. Previous studies have typically trained 
models on the RPLAN dataset to generate layouts of residential build -
ings. RPLAN is a large dataset that helps in the training of deep learning 
models, but its data collection is an obstacle to the usability of the 
models. Instead of adopting the RPLAN dataset, the study proposes a 
new dataset suitable for this hybrid model and a workflow for data 
processing. Results of testing scenarios show that the hybrid model can 
generate effective architectural layouts after training on the dataset and 
the users are highly satisfied with this limited-size dataset. Since this 
hybrid model has an efficient way of preparing data, it is not a black box 
for users compared to other AIGC tools that require large data sets. In 
addition, the proposed hybrid model performs well in the design of two 
greatly different building types, demonstrating its generalizability.
An area for improvement is that the proposed hybrid model may 
learn about the design flaws present in the dataset. This is because some 
older residences with design flaws were included in the dataset for this 
study. Although hybrid models are considered to perform well on 
limited-size datasets, preparing larger and newer datasets is still the 
recommended way to enhance training and avoid learning noise. In this 
study, ABM has been set up with only the most basic rules for room 
generation and topology constraints. Complex rules regarding room 
orientation, circulation, and zoning need to be added in the future to 
make the hybrid model applicable to more building types. Another 
limitation of this hybrid model is that the generated layouts do not 
include doors and windows, so the architect will still need to fine-tune 
the results to exactly match the building circulation defined by the 
graphical topology.
Regarding the limitations of this study, although we applied the 
hybrid model to two highly different building types, which did not occur 
in existing studies, testing the model on a wider range of building types 
is still necessary for validating the generalizability of the model. 
Furthermore, in the generative design process, the participants are all 
architectural experts, no consideration is given to the non-experts in the 
architectural design process and the usability of the hybrid model for a 
wider co-design workflow. Therefore, inviting more participants with 
more diverse backgrounds to evaluate generative design with the 
application of the proposed hybrid model will be necessary in the future.
Unlike the hybrid approach proposed in [ 48 ], which also employed 
learning-based models and ABM, the hybrid model in this study can be 
used for two completely different building types rather than just resi -
dential buildings. The room shape generation algorithm in this study is 
inspired by the evolutionary computation in [ 51 ], but the hybrid model 
in this paper pays more attention to the topology of the building layout 
rather than just the room shape. By acknowledging those similarities 
and differences with existing studies, this study is positioned as an 
innovative contribution to the field of generative AI in architectural 
layout generation. This study emphasizes efficiency, user satisfaction, 
and spatial relationships in generated layouts, providing architects and 
designers with an available and effective tool for generating rational 
architectural layouts. The proposed hybrid model is not meant to take 
the place of architects; instead, by deconstructing and simulating 
architectural design workflows driven by human experience, it is 
designed as a tool using computer power to address spatial generation. 
The model automatically generates diverse architectural layouts based 
on the user's prompts for function and area. From prompts to layouts, 
architects are able to complete architectural designs more efficiently 
with the help of this hybrid model and could be more focused on fine- 
tuning the solution and artistic style.
6. Conclusions and future work
This paper presented a data-driven approach for automated GAD, the 
main result of which is the development of a hybrid model that can 
generate architectural layouts according to user prompts. The structure 
of the hybrid model is designed by deconstructing and simulating the 
human-driven design workflow. The hybrid model consists of three sub- 
models: (1) A graph generation model for generating architectural 
graphs by GraphSAGE according to user prompts; (2) An agent-based 
model for generating room shapes and organizing spaces under topo -
logical constraints; (3) A seed generation model for initializing the pa -
rameters of the spaces by GCN for the agent-based model.
Using this hybrid model in GAD helps improve architects' work ef -
ficiency and inspires their creativity. The contribution of our model is 
the learning of architects' knowledge and experience from data through 
GNNs, which automatically generate rational architectural layouts 
based on prompts related to human requirements. In addition, the 
integration of the rule-based ABM and the learning-based GNNs makes it 
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
19 

===== PAGE 20 =====
possible to reduce the data necessary to train the hybrid model and 
facilitate its usability, which is another contribution of the model. 
Because of these features, the proposed hybrid model generates rational 
layouts in an efficient way and does not bring impediments to the model 
generalizability due to excessive usage costs. The evaluation of several 
testing scenarios for GAD has shown that the hybrid model generates 
diverse layouts with rational spatial relationships and has high user 
satisfaction. Theoretically, the study underscores the synergy between 
advanced AI technology and human-centered design due to the decon -
struction of human experience-driven workflow and research on 
computational design. This study illuminates how leveraging intelligent 
algorithms including GNNs and ABM, when enriched with data-driven 
insights, can bridge gaps in understanding and collaboration between 
architects and generative approaches. As computational architecture 
continues to advance, efforts in this paper will further assist designers in 
creating elegant architectural works.
The future works aim to enrich and broaden the implementation of 
the hybrid model. A valuable extension to the research involves further 
testing the generalizability of hybrid model on a wider variety of 
building datasets and considering more kinds of prompts as input con -
ditions during the architectural layout generation process. More com -
plex rules in ABM may be necessary when the hybrid model is run on 
more diverse datasets, so samples of more types of buildings will be 
collected and made into multiple datasets to test the model. Whether 
incorporating other requirements like entrance location, windows, 
doors, daylight, and ventilation into the prompts could influence spatial 
relationships and design outcomes is also worth investigating in the 
future. In addition, more stakeholders in the architectural workflow will 
be invited to use and evaluate the hybrid model in the future to help us 
improve it.
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.autcon.2025.106253 .
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Yangpeng Xin: Writing – original draft, Visualization, Software, 
Methodology, Formal analysis, Data curation. Ying Zhou: Writing – 
review & editing, Supervision, Project administration, Funding acqui -
sition, Conceptualization. Yuanyuan Liu: Software, Formal analysis, 
Conceptualization.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial 
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence 
the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgments
The research team extends our gratitude to the National Natural 
Science Foundation of China for supporting this study. This study was 
funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 
52478010) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Certificate 
Number: 2023M730565).
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
[1] J. Hunt, R. Miles, Toward an intelligent architectural design aid, Expert. Syst. 12 
(1995) 209 – 218, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0394.1995.tb00110.x .
[2] M. Bitarafan, S. Bagher Hosseini, S.J. Hashemi-Fesharaki, A. Esmailzadeh, Role of 
architectural space in blast-resistant buildings, Front. Archit. Res. 2 (2013) 67 – 73, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foar.2012.11.003 .
[3] W. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Du, C. Liu, S.K. Youn, X. Guo, Machine-learning assisted 
topology optimization for architectural design with artistic flavor, Comput. 
Methods Appl. Mech. Eng. 413 (2023) 116041, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
cma.2023.116041 .
[4] M. Aalaei, M. Saadi, M. Rahbar, A. Ekhlassi, Architectural layout generation using 
a graph-constrained conditional generative adversarial network (GAN), Autom. 
Constr. 155 (2023), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2023.105053 .
[5] P. Schwaiger, C. Schelings, S. Safin, C. Elsen, in: S. Bagnara, R. Tartaglia, 
S. Albolino, T. Alexander, Y. Fujita (Eds.), Co-Design in Architectural Practice: 
Impact of Client Involvement during Self-Construction Experiences, Springer 
International Publishing, Cham, 2019, pp. 441 – 452, https://doi.org/10.1007/978- 
3-319-96068-5_50 .
[6] T. Tan, G. Mills, E. Papadonikolaki, B. Li, J. Huang, Digital-enabled Design for 
Manufacture and Assembly (DfMA) in offsite construction: a modularity 
perspective for the product and process integration, Archit. Eng. Des. Manag. 19 
(2023) 267 – 282, https://doi.org/10.1080/17452007.2022.2104208 .
[7] B.L. Waters, M.K. Dixit, F. Pariafsai, Architects ’ ranking of professional design 
services, Archit. Eng. Des. Manag. 19 (2023) 620 – 641, https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
17452007.2022.2147896 .
[8] L. Zhang, M. Tang, Y. Xu, C. Zhang, Application research on artificial intelligence 
generated content in architectural design, ACM Int. Conf. Proc. Series (2024) 
671 – 680, https://doi.org/10.1145/3662739.3673681 .
[9] Z. Zhang, J.M. Fort, L. Gim ´enez Mateu, Decoding emotional responses to AI- 
generated architectural imagery, Front. Psychol. 15 (2024), https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fpsyg.2024.1348083 .
[10] L. Tan, M. Luhrs, Using generative AI Midjourney to enhance divergent and 
convergent thinking in an architect ’ s creative design process, Des. J. 27 (2024) 
677 – 699, https://doi.org/10.1080/14606925.2024.2353479 .
[11] S. Jacoby, Typal and typological reasoning: a diagrammatic practice of 
architecture, J. Archit. 20 (2015) 938 – 961, https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
13602365.2015.1116104 .
[12] L. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Zeng, G. Cheng, H. Hu, J. Hu, X. Huang, Automated building 
layout generation using deep learning and graph algorithms, Autom. Constr. 154 
(2023) 105036, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2023.105036 .
[13] B. Topuz, N. Çakici Alp, Machine learning in architecture, Autom. Constr. 154 
(2023), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2023.105012 .
[14] A. AlOmani, K. El-Rayes, Automated generation of optimal thematic architectural 
layouts using image processing, Autom. Constr. 117 (2020) 103255, https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.autcon.2020.103255 .
[15] S. Khalili Araghi, R. Stouffs, Exploring cellular automata for high density 
residential building form generation, Autom. Constr. 49 (2015) 152 – 162, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2014.10.007 .
[16] P. Tofighi, A. Ekhlassi, M. Rahbar, A hybrid approach of generative design methods 
for designing tall-buildings form, Adv. Computat. Des. 7 (2022) 153 – 171, https:// 
doi.org/10.12989/acd.2022.7.2.153 .
[17] C. Cubukcuoglu, P. Nourian, I.S. Sariyildiz, M.F. Tasgetiren, Optimal design of new 
hospitals: a computational workflow for stacking, zoning, and routing, Autom. 
Constr. 134 (2022) 104102, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2021.104102 .
[18] S. Chaillou, ArchiGAN: Artificial intelligence x architecture, in: P.F. Yuan, M. Xie, 
N. Leach, J. Yao, X. Wang (Eds.), Architectural Intelligence, Springer Nature 
Singapore, Singapore, 2020, pp. 117 – 127, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15- 
6568-7_8 .
[19] S. Chaillou, AI + Architecture, Harvard University, 2019. https://www.academia. 
edu/39599650/AI_Architecture_Towards_a_New_Approach .
[20] W. Wu, X.-M. Fu, R. Tang, Y. Wang, Y.-H. Qi, L. Liu, Data-driven interior plan 
generation for residential buildings, ACM Trans. Graph. 38 (2019) 1 – 12, https:// 
doi.org/10.1145/3355089.3356556 .
[21] N.O. Hanafy, Artificial intelligence ’ s effects on design process creativity: “ A study 
on used A.I. Text-to-Image in architecture, ” , J. Build. Eng. 80 (2023) 107999 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2023.107999 .
[22] J. Ko, B. Ennemoser, W. Yoo, W. Yan, M.J. Clayton, Architectural spatial layout 
planning using artificial intelligence, Autom. Constr. 154 (2023) 105019, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2023.105019 .
[23] P. Nourian, S. Rezvani, S. Sariyildiz, Designing with Space Syntax, in: Proceedings 
of the 31st International Conference on Education and Research in Computer Aided 
Architectural Design in Europe (ECAADe) [Volume 1], 2022, pp. 357 – 365, https:// 
doi.org/10.52842/conf.ecaade.2013.1.357 .
[24] S.K. Jeong, Y.U. Ban, Developing a topological information extraction model for 
space syntax analysis, Build. Environ. 46 (2011) 2442 – 2453, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.buildenv.2011.05.024 .
[25] H. Yuan, Y. Zhou, Impact of floor plans on visibility among healthcare members in 
inpatient care units: employing agent-based simulation and social network 
analysis, Front. Archit. Res. (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foar.2024.07.007 .
[26] Y. Zhou, Y. Wang, C. Li, L. Ding, Z. Yang, Health and comfort oriented automatic 
generative design and optimization of residence space layout: an integrated data- 
driven and knowledge-based approach, Develop. Built Environ. 17 (2024) 100318, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dibe.2023.100318 .
[27] J. Liu, Z. Qiu, L. Wang, P. Liu, G. Cheng, Y. Chen, Intelligent floor plan design of 
modular high-rise residential building based on graph-constrained generative 
adversarial networks, Autom. Constr. 159 (2024) 105264, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.autcon.2023.105264 .
[28] H.C. Huang, S.M. Lo, G.S. Zhi, R.K.K. Yuen, Graph theory-based approach for 
automatic recognition of CAD data, Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell. 21 (2008) 1073 – 1079, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2007.12.001 .
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
20 

===== PAGE 21 =====
[29] J.H. Lee, M.J. Ostwald, N. Gu, A syntactical and grammatical approach to 
architectural configuration, analysis and generation, Archit. Sci. Rev. 58 (2015) 
189 – 204, https://doi.org/10.1080/00038628.2015.1015948 .
[30] Y. Zheng, Y. Lin, L. Zhao, T. Wu, D. Jin, Y. Li, Spatial planning of urban 
communities via deep reinforcement learning, Nat. Comput. Sci. 3 (2023) 
748 – 762, https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-023-00503-5 .
[31] X. Lin, J. Chen, W. Lu, H. Guo, An edge-weighted graph triumvirate to represent 
modular building layouts, Autom. Constr. 157 (2024) 105140, https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.autcon.2023.105140 .
[32] Y. Gao, G. Xiong, H. Li, J. Richards, Exploring bridge maintenance knowledge 
graph by leveraging GrapshSAGE and text encoding, Autom. Constr. 166 (2024) 
105634, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2024.105634 .
[33] K. Li, V.J.L. Gan, M. Li, M.Y. Gao, R.L.K. Tiong, Y. Yang, Automated generative 
design and prefabrication of precast buildings using integrated BIM and graph 
convolutional neural network, Develop. Built Environ. 18 (2024) 100418, https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/j.dibe.2024.100418 .
[34] B. Wang, M. Li, Z. Peng, W. Lu, Hierarchical attributed graph-based generative 
façade parsing for high-rise residential buildings, Autom. Constr. 164 (2024), 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2024.105471 .
[35] H. Hua, Irregular architectural layout synthesis with graphical inputs, Autom. 
Constr. 72 (2016) 388 – 396, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2016.09.009 .
[36] V.J.L. Gan, BIM-based graph data model for automatic generative design of 
modular buildings, Autom. Constr. 134 (2022) 104062, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
autcon.2021.104062 .
[37] P. Veli ˇckovi ´c, Everything is connected: graph neural networks, Curr. Opin. Struct. 
Biol. 79 (2023), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbi.2023.102538 .
[38] J. Knechtel, P. Rottmann, J.H. Haunert, Y. Dehbi, Semantic floorplan segmentation 
using self-constructing graph networks, Autom. Constr. 166 (2024) 105649, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2024.105649 .
[39] N. Nauata, K.-H. Chang, C.-Y. Cheng, G. Mori, Y. Furukawa, House-GAN: relational 
generative adversarial networks for graph-constrained house layout generation, in: 
Computer Vision – ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 
23 – 28, 2020, Proceedings, Part I 16, Springer, 2020, pp. 162 – 177, https://doi.org/ 
10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8_10 .
[40] N. Nauata, S. Hosseini, K.H. Chang, H. Chu, C.Y. Cheng, Y. Furukawa, House-GaN +
+ : generative adversarial layout refinement network towards intelligent 
computational agent for professional architects, in: Proceedings of the IEEE 
Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021, 
pp. 13627 – 13636, https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.01342 .
[41] H. Tang, Z. Zhang, H. Shi, B. Li, L. Shao, N. Sebe, R. Timofte, L. Van Gool, Graph 
Transformer GANs for Graph-Constrained House Generation, in: Proceedings of the 
IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 
2023-June, 2023, pp. 2173 – 2182, https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
CVPR52729.2023.00216 .
[42] H. Tang, L. Shao, N. Sebe, L. Van Gool, Graph transformer GANs with graph 
masked modeling for architectural layout generation, IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. 
Mach. Intell. 46 (2024) 4298 – 4313, https://doi.org/10.1109/ 
TPAMI.2024.3355248 .
[43] C.M. Macal, M.J. North, Tutorial on agent-based modelling and simulation vol. 
7778, 2017, https://doi.org/10.1057/jos.2010.3 .
[44] D. Stieler, T. Schwinn, S. Leder, M. Maierhofer, F. Kannenberg, A. Menges, Agent- 
based modeling and simulation in architecture, Autom. Constr. 141 (2022), 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2022.104426 .
[45] Y. Liu, Y. Zhou, L. Yang, Y. Xin, Simulating staff activities in healthcare 
environments : an empirical multi-agent modeling approach, J. Build. Eng. 84 
(2024) 108580, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2024.108580 .
[46] Y. Xin, Y. Zhou, L. Yang, Y. Liu, T. Tan, Developments in the built environment 
enhancing healthcare environment design evaluations through an interactive 
virtual reality-based approach : a design science research, Develop. Built Environ. 
18 (2024) 100440, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dibe.2024.100440 .
[47] B. Vinh, D. Nguyen, T. Wang, C. Peng, B. Vinh, D. Nguyen, T. Wang, C. Peng, 
Integration of agent-based modelling of social- spatial processes in architectural 
parametric design Integration of agent-based modelling of social-spatial processes 
in architectural ABSTRACT 8628, 2020, https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00038628.2019.1640107 .
[48] M. Rahbar, M. Mahdavinejad, A.H.D. Markazi, M. Bemanian, Architectural layout 
design through deep learning and agent-based modeling: a hybrid approach, 
J. Build. Eng. 47 (2022) 103822, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2021.103822 .
[49] Z. Zhang, Z. Guo, H. Zheng, Z. Li, P.F. Yuan, Automated architectural spatial 
composition via multi-agent deep reinforcement learning for building renovation, 
Autom. Constr. 167 (2024) 105702, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
autcon.2024.105702 .
[50] A.O. Yavuz, T. Yildirim, Utilization of digital-algorithmic design tools in 
architectural basic design education, Procedia Soc, Behav. Sci. 51 (2012) 307 – 310, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.08.164 .
[51] M. Inoue, H. Takagi, Layout algorithm for an EC-based room layout planning 
support system, in: SMCia/08 - Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE Conference on Soft 
Computing on Industrial Applications, 2008, pp. 165 – 170, https://doi.org/ 
10.1109/SMCIA.2008.5045954 .
[52] P. Merrell, E. Schkufza, V. Koltun, Computer-generated residential building 
layouts, ACM Trans. Graph. 29 (2010) 1 – 12, https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
1882261.1866203 .
[53] Z. Guo, B. Li, Evolutionary approach for spatial architecture layout design 
enhanced by an agent-based topology finding system, Front. Archit. Res. 6 (2017) 
53 – 62, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foar.2016.11.003 .
[54] R. Hu, Z. Huang, Y. Tang, O. Van Kaick, H. Zhang, H. Huang, Graph2Plan: learning 
floorplan generation from layout graphs, ACM Trans. Graph. 39 (2020), https:// 
doi.org/10.1145/3386569.3392391 .
[55] C.W. Zhao, J. Yang, J. Li, Generation of hospital emergency department layouts 
based on generative adversarial networks, J. Build. Eng. 43 (2021) 102539, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2021.102539 .
[56] L. Wang, H. Zhang, X. Liu, G. Ji, Exploring the synergy of building massing and 
façade design through evolutionary optimization, Front. Archit. Res. 11 (2022) 
761 – 780, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foar.2022.02.002 .
[57] C. Zhang, M.X. Tao, C. Wang, J.S. Fan, End-to-end generation of structural 
topology for complex architectural layouts with graph neural networks, Comput. 
Aided Civ. Inf. Eng. 39 (2024) 756 – 775, https://doi.org/10.1111/mice.13098 .
[58] S. Wang, W. Zeng, X. Chen, Y. Ye, Y. Qiao, C.W. Fu, ActFloor-GAN: activity-guided 
adversarial networks for human-centric floorplan design, IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. 
Graph. 29 (2023) 1610 – 1624, https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.2021.3126478 .
[59] S. Halligan, D.G. Altman, S. Mallett, Disadvantages of using the area under the 
receiver operating characteristic curve to assess imaging tests: a discussion and 
proposal for an alternative approach, Eur. Radiol. 25 (2015) 932 – 939, https://doi. 
org/10.1007/s00330-014-3487-0 .
[60] P. Zhao, W. Liao, Y. Huang, X. Lu, Intelligent beam layout design for frame 
structure based on graph neural networks, J. Build. Eng. 63 (2023) 105499, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jobe.2022.105499 .
[61] H. Klüpfel, Crowd Dynamics Phenomena, Methodology, and Simulation, 2009, 
https://doi.org/10.1108/9781848557512-010 .
[62] F. Bertault, A force-directed algorithm that preserves edge crossing properties, 
Lecture Notes Comput. Sci. (Including Subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial 
Intelligence and Lecture Notes in Bioinformatics) 1731 (1999) 351 – 358, https:// 
doi.org/10.1007/3-540-46648-7_36 .
[63] S.H. Cheong, Y.W. Si, Force-directed algorithms for schematic drawings and 
placement: a survey, Inf. Vis. 19 (2020) 65 – 91, https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
1473871618821740 .
[64] T. Zhang, H.R. Shan, M.A. Little, Causal GraphSAGE: a robust graph method for 
classification based on causal sampling, Pattern Recogn. 128 (2022) 108696, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.patcog.2022.108696 .
[65] S. Abu-El-Haija, A. Kapoor, B. Perozzi, J. Lee, N-GCN: multi-scale graph 
convolution for semi-supervised node classification, in: 35th Conference on 
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, UAI 2019, 2018. http://arxiv.org/abs/1 
802.08888 .
[66] I. Bakurov, M. Buzzelli, R. Schettini, M. Castelli, L. Vanneschi, Structural similarity 
index (SSIM) revisited: a data-driven approach, Expert Syst. Appl. 189 (2022) 
116087, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2021.116087 .
[67] I. Karadag, O.Z. Güzelci, S. Alaçam, EDU-AI: a twofold machine learning model to 
support classroom layout generation, Constr. Innov. 23 (2023) 898 – 914, https:// 
doi.org/10.1108/CI-02-2022-0034 .
[68] H. Nourkojouri, A. Nikkhah Dehnavi, S. Bahadori, M. Tahsildoost, Early design 
stage evaluation of architectural factors in fire emergency evacuation of the 
buildings using Pix2Pix and explainable XGBoost model, J. Build. Perform. Simul. 
16 (2023) 415 – 433, https://doi.org/10.1080/19401493.2022.2163422 .
[69] H. Bunke, On a relation between graph edit distance and maximum common 
subgraph, Pattern Recogn. Lett. 18 (1997) 689 – 694, https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
S0167-8655(97)00060-3 .
[70] R. Baskerville, A. Baiyere, S. Gregor, A. Hevner, M. Rossi, Design science research 
contributions: finding a balance between artifact and theory, J. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 19 
(2018) 358 – 376, https://doi.org/10.17705/1jais.00495 .
[71] H.A. Simon, The Sciences of the Artificial, 2019, https://doi.org/10.7551/ 
mitpress/12107.001.0001 .
[72] R. Weber, C. Mueller, C. Reinhart, A hypergraph model shows the carbon reduction 
potential of effective space use in housing, Nat. Commun. (2024), https://doi.org/ 
10.1038/s41467-024-52506-z .
[73] R.E. Weber, C. Mueller, C. Reinhart, Automated floorplan generation in 
architectural design: a review of methods and applications, Autom. Constr. 140 
(2022) 104385, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2022.104385 .
[74] G. Laignel, N. Pozin, X. Geffrier, L. Delevaux, F. Brun, B. Dolla, Floor plan 
generation through a mixed constraint programming-genetic optimization 
approach, Autom. Constr. 123 (2021) 103491, https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
autcon.2020.103491 .
[75] L. Carrera, N. Brullet, J. Capomaggi, A. Santacana, R. Devesa, G. Rossell ´o, 
E. Romero, L. Ortega, The impact of architecturally qualified data in deep learning 
methods for the automatic generation of social housing layouts, Autom. Constr. 
158 (2024), https://doi.org/10.1016/j.autcon.2023.105238 .
Y. Xin et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Automation in Construction 176 (2025) 106253 
21 