

===== PAGE 1 =====
Academic Editor: Ludovico Minati
Received: 12 November 2024
Revised: 19 December 2024
Accepted: 28 December 2024
Published: 3 January 2025
Citation: Zhang, L.; Hu, Y.; Li, W.; Bai,
Q.; Nand, P . LLM-AIDSim:
LLM-Enhanced Agent-Based
Influence Diffusion Simulation in
Social Networks. Systems 2025, 13, 29.
https://doi.org/10.3390/
systems13010029
Copyright: © 2025 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license
(https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/).
Article
LLM-AIDSim: LLM-Enhanced Agent-Based Influence Diffusion
Simulation in Social Networks
Lan Zhang 1,*
 , Yuxuan Hu 2
 , Weihua Li 1,*
 , Quan Bai 2 and Parma Nand 1
1 School of Engineering, Computer & Mathematical Sciences, Auckland University of Technology,
Auckland 1010, New Zealand; parma.nand@aut.ac.nz
2 School of Information and Communication Technology, University of Tasmania, Hobart, TAS 7001, Australia;
yuxuan.hu@utas.edu.au (Y.H.); quan.bai@utas.edu.au (Q.B.)
* Correspondence: lan.zhang@autuni.ac.nz (L.Z.); weihua.li@aut.ac.nz (W.L.)
Abstract: This paper introduces an LLM-Enhanced Agent-Based Influence Diffusion Sim-
ulation (LLM-AIDSim) framework that integrates large language models (LLMs) into
agent-based modelling to simulate influence diffusion in social networks. The proposed
framework enhances traditional influence diffusion models by allowing agents to gen-
erate language-level responses, providing deeper insights into user agent interactions.
Our framework addresses the limitations of probabilistic models by simulating realistic,
context-aware user behaviours in response to public statements. Using real-world news
topics, we demonstrate the effectiveness of LLM-AIDSim in simulating topic evolution
and tracking user discourse, validating its ability to replicate key aspects of real-world
information propagation. Our experimental results highlight the role of influence diffusion
in shaping collective discussions, revealing that, over time, diffusion narrows the focus
of conversations around a few dominant topics. We further analyse regional differences
in topic clustering and diffusion behaviours across three cities, Sydney, Auckland, and
Hobart, revealing how demographics, income, and education levels influence topic dom-
inance. This work underscores the potential of LLM-AIDSim as a decision-support tool
for strategic communication, enabling organizations to anticipate and understand public
sentiment trends.
Keywords: influence diffusion; LLM-enhanced social simulation; topic evolution; agent-
based modelling
1. Introduction
Information propagation describes how information, ideas, or opinions are spread
through social networks [ 1–3]. In the context of public communication, refers to the
diffusion of statements released by organisations, such as news, policies, or public an-
nouncements, through social networks [4]. This process is particularly applicable to many
business companies and government organisations, as it impacts public perception and
influences individuals’ decision-making behaviours. Effective information propagation can
enhance organisational outreach and drive significant societal impacts, while poorly crafted
statements can exacerbate public concerns and even lead to crises [5]. However, a critical
issue when disseminating an official statement is that the public response is somewhat
unpredictable [4]. This loss of control may even lead to polarisation and extremism in social
networks [1,6].
Simulating potential outcomes prior to public release can help address this challenge
by summarising potential public concerns for decision-makers to consider, allowing them
Systems 2025, 13, 29 https://doi.org/10.3390/systems13010029

===== PAGE 2 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 2 of 28
to refine the message they want to convey. Influence diffusion models are widely used to
simulate the information propagation process [7]. Traditional influence diffusion models
are primarily probabilistic, where individuals’ decision-making behaviours depend on in-
fluence probabilities [7,8]. Moreover, agent-based modelling (ABM) has been incorporated
into these diffusion models to emphasise distinctive personal traits and complex interactive
behaviours [2]. However, most existing ABM approaches overlook the language-level
inferences and understanding capabilities of user agents. Additionally, they simulate infor-
mation propagation as a passive process, where the initial influence message is transmitted
through the network without considering information alteration [9], which refers to the
ability of individuals to modify the content of the influence message based on their per-
sonal profiles and experiences. This limitation makes it challenging to capture and infer the
language-level responses from individuals.
To address the aforementioned challenges, in this paper, we proposed an LLM-driven
influence diffusion simulation tool called LLM-AIDSim. We apply the influence diffusion
simulation technique on an LLM-driven user agent model which utilises real social net-
works to predict user behaviours concerning news, ideas, and topics. The primary goal
is to simulate potential user comments and estimate public opinion direction before the
actual publication of news content. This insight is crucial, as the impact of news and the
resulting public opinions are typically measurable only after they have been propagated.
By simulating reactions beforehand, this system provides valuable guidance for adjusting
news content to steer public opinion effectively, thus enhancing strategic communication
efforts. This approach not only anticipates public reactions but also aids in refining the
messaging to better align with desired outcomes.
The contribution of our work can be summarised as follows:
• Firstly, we proposed an LLM-Enhanced Agent-Based Influence Diffusion (LLM-AID)
model. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that combines LLMs with
influence diffusion modelling. This combination addresses the limitations of tradi-
tional influence diffusion models, which are primarily probabilistic, by incorporating
language-level inferences and interactions among user agents. Furthermore, instead
of directly passing by a spreading influence message in existing influence diffusion
models, LLM-AID emphasises individuals’ responses to a public statement.
• Secondly, we developed a simulation framework, LLM-AIDSim, built on our proposed
LLM-AID model. Unlike traditional influence diffusion simulations that primarily
focus on numeric metrics, such as influence convergence, LLM-AIDSim provides a
deeper understanding of user agents’ behaviours by incorporating language-level
interactions into the simulation. To address the gap in language-level analysis in
influence diffusion, LLM-AIDSim integrates the Independent Cascade (IC) model
with a user-agent-based approach, which was originally introduced by Kempe et al. [7].
This method closely replicates real-world diffusion scenarios, such as viral marketing
or the spread of information through social media. To further enhance the simulation,
we incorporate LLM-driven responses, allowing us to explore the implicit inferences
derived from agents’ language interactions. However, to mitigate the challenges of
computational cost and the inherent randomness of LLMs, we fine-tuned the model
using real-world datasets, including New York Times Articles and Comments1. This
fine-tuning ensures that LLM-AIDSim can be efficiently deployed locally, with output
that closely reflects actual user posting behaviour in real-world contexts.
• Thirdly, to showcase the practical utility of LLM-AIDSim, we developed a web-based
decision-support system called LLM-AIDSim system, tailored to support strategic
communication. This system is designed to provide actionable insights derived
from LLM-driven agent-based influence diffusion simulations, enabling organisa-

===== PAGE 3 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 3 of 28
tions to develop more effective communication strategies. We conducted multiple
scenarios under various application settings, demonstrating the capability of our pro-
posed framework to interpret implicit influences at the language level, which informs
decision-makers in crafting impactful communication strategies.
The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 reviews related works in the
fields of LLM-driven social simulation, agent-based modelling, and influence diffusion.
Section 3 presents the overall framework of our proposed LLM-AIDSim. Section 4 intro-
duces our proposed influence diffusion model, LLM-AID. Section 5 provides details about
LLM-AIDSim. Section 6 demonstrates the experiments and their results, and Section 7
concludes the paper.
2. Related Works
2.1. Influence Diffusion
Influence diffusion is an instinctive phenomenon in social networks that describes
how information, opinions, ideas, or products propagate contagiously. It is critical for
understanding and predicting user behaviour in contexts such as marketing, political
campaigns, and information spread. Influence diffusion models are widely used to anal-
yse these patterns within networks, allowing researchers to identify key influencers and
maximise the impact of information propagation. Among these models, the Independent
Cascade (IC) model, introduced by Kempe et al. [ 7], has become a foundational tool in
social network analysis. Its simplicity and adaptability make it one of the most effective
models for simulating how information, behaviours, or products spread through networks.
Despite its wide usage, recent research has focused on addressing some limitations of the
IC model by proposing enhancements and extensions.
For instance, Kong et al. [ 10] proposed the Decreasing Cascade (DC) model, which
generalises the IC model by considering market saturation and decreasing activation prob-
abilities over time. This reflects real-world scenarios where the likelihood of influencing a
node diminishes after multiple unsuccessful attempts, providing a more realistic frame-
work for applications like viral marketing, where repeated marketing efforts may lose
effectiveness. However, while the DC model improves the realism of influence diffusion,
it primarily focuses on reducing the activation probability over time and does not fully
account for contextual user behaviours or network dynamics that may influence the spread
of information. Similarly, Zhu et al. [11] introduced the Node Feature-Aware Voting Algo-
rithm (ISVoteRank) to improve seed selection in influence maximisation. By adapting the IC
model to consider node-specific interaction attributes, ISVoteRank enhances the efficiency
of influence propagation, particularly in networks with temporal dynamics. While this
approach optimises seed selection, it is limited by its reliance on static node attributes and
does not sufficiently address the evolving nature of user preferences or external factors that
might affect influence spread in real-time scenarios.
Kumar et al. [12] propose a hybrid framework that integrates the traditional Indepen-
dent Cascade (IC) model with machine learning techniques to optimize seed selection. By
leveraging a graph-based neural network, their approach efficiently predicts influence prob-
abilities, thereby significantly reducing computational costs. However, while this method
achieves high efficiency, it does not account for real-time user feedback. This limitation is
critical for applications such as misinformation control or dynamic social environments,
where user behaviour and influence probabilities evolve continuously. To address the
shortcomings of static models, Liu et al. [13] introduced a continuous Independent Cascade
model that incorporates real-time feedback. Their model tackles challenges such as incom-
plete information and dynamic network structures by incorporating node-level feedback,
enhancing the accuracy of influence propagation predictions. This advancement proves

===== PAGE 4 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 4 of 28
particularly effective in dynamic settings such as viral marketing and misinformation
control. Nevertheless, scalability remains a challenge, especially when real-time feedback
introduces significant computational overhead in large-scale networks.
Saito et al. [ 14] focus on improving the accuracy of influence diffusion predictions
by estimating IC model parameters using real-world network data. Their enhanced prob-
abilistic model delivers more accurate rankings of influential nodes and predictions of
information spread. However, the model struggles to adapt to rapidly changing network
topologies and heterogeneous user behaviours. Li et al. [15] tackle the issue of mitigating
undesirable influences in online social networks. They propose an agent-based influence
diffusion model combined with context-aware algorithms to effectively reduce negative
impacts. By leveraging both user and influence contexts, their findings provide practical
strategies for controlling the spread of information in social networks, offering valuable
insights into influence dynamics.
Wang et al. [9] contribute a novel seed selection algorithm for influence maximization
with minimal network modifications. Their work highlights the balance between maxi-
mizing influence and reducing disruption, which is particularly relevant for real-world
applications where stability is essential.
Influence diffusion remains a pivotal tool in the study of social networks. Researchers
have extensively utilized this mechanism within agent-based modelling (ABM), and re-
cent advancements are exploring its integration into LLM-driven social simulations. As
large language models (LLMs) become increasingly powerful, they present opportunities
to enhance social simulations by incorporating natural language capabilities and more
sophisticated decision-making processes.
2.2. Agent-Based Modelling and LLM-Driven Social Simulation
Agent-based modelling and simulation (ABM) provides a robust framework for un-
derstanding and analysing complex systems by focusing on individual agents and their
interactions within an environment. Agents in ABM are heterogeneous, equipped with
distinct attributes, states, and decision-making rules. Their behaviours adapt dynami-
cally based on environmental and contextual factors, leading to emergent system-wide
phenomena [16,17].
Over the past few decades, ABM has become an invaluable tool for studying intricate
phenomena that are otherwise challenging to observe directly in real-world settings. It
facilitates experimentation, hypothesis testing, and scenario analysis, offering insights
into the behaviour of systems under diverse conditions. Applications of ABM span multi-
ple domains, including economics, biology, sociology, and ecology, where it has proven
instrumental in aiding decision making and analysing complex dynamics.
Luo et al. [18] developed a layered framework to simulate human decision-making
processes, incorporating physiological, emotional, and social group attributes to shape
agent behaviour. This approach offers a nuanced representation of individual decision
making within social contexts. Similarly, Kountouriotis et al. [19] modelled crowd dynam-
ics, demonstrating how individual actions aggregate into collective behavioural patterns.
These studies highlight ABM’s capability to simulate both micro-level (individual) and
macro-level (system-wide) behaviours, providing insights into emergent trends.
ABM has also been extensively applied to model opinion dynamics. Liu and Wen [20]
investigated the interplay between social connections and opinion formation, introducing
models that dynamically adjust social network structures based on agent interactions.
Their work provides a realistic depiction of evolving social influence and reflects the
growing emphasis on hybrid models for simulating fluid social behaviours. Similarly, Li
et al. [2] proposed an adaptive agent-based evolutionary model (ABEM) that integrates

===== PAGE 5 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 5 of 28
genetic algorithms to optimize influencer selection in dynamic networks, achieving sig-
nificant improvements in influence maximization. Flache et al. [21] reviewed theoretical
advancements in social influence modelling, addressing Axelrod’s seminal question of why
differences in beliefs, attitudes, and behaviours persist despite the homogenizing effects
of social interactions [22]. Further, Banisch et al. [23] employed Markov chains within an
agent-based framework to bridge micro-level agent behaviours with macro-level opinion
dynamics, offering a powerful mathematical tool for studying opinion evolution. Other
works, including those by Madey et al., El-Sayed et al., and Gilbert [24–26], extend ABM to
social networks, showcasing its adaptability for modelling diverse social phenomena.
Beyond social behaviours, ABM has made significant contributions in economics.
Researchers have utilized agent-based models to explore economic systems [27,28], analyse
market dynamics [29,30], and investigate the behaviour of individual economic agents [31].
These studies underscore ABM’s ability to capture nuanced interactions among economic
agents, providing insights into systemic risks and market trends.
In healthcare, ABM has been widely adopted for modelling and simulating disease
spread. Cabrera et al. [32] and Barnes et al. [33] demonstrated its effectiveness in simulating
public health scenarios, such as disease outbreaks [34], evaluating healthcare systems [35],
and assessing intervention strategies [36]. Elsenbroich et al. [37] applied ABM to analyse
societal factors influencing health inequalities, providing valuable insights into the spread
of infectious diseases and behavioural responses to public health interventions. These
studies showcase ABM’s versatility in capturing emergent health dynamics and informing
public health decision making.
Agent-based modelling and simulation (ABM) offers a versatile and powerful frame-
work for simulating complex systems by focusing on individual agents and their inter-
actions within specific environments. Agents in ABM are heterogeneous and equipped
with unique attributes, states, and decision-making rules. By dynamically adapting their
behaviours based on environmental and contextual factors, agents can collectively pro-
duce emergent patterns at the system level [16,17]. ABM provides valuable insights into
areas, such as social dynamics, crowd behaviour, economics, and healthcare. However,
a major challenge lies in developing generalized agents capable of performing across di-
verse environments. These environments vary significantly in complexity, dynamics, and
uncertainty, making it difficult to create agents that are universally effective. For instance,
agents optimized for opinion dynamics may not perform equally well in economic or
healthcare simulations. By modelling individual agents and their interactions, ABM reveals
the intricate interplay that gives rise to emergent system behaviours.
The ability to acquire and use language is a key trait that differentiates humans
from other species [ 38]. Simulation, as a computational technique, mirrors real-world
systems and processes using mathematical models, algorithms, and digital representations.
ABM excels in this domain by simulating individual entities, or agents, each with defined
behaviours and decision-making rules, to explore complex phenomena resulting from
agent interactions [16]. Integrating large language models (LLMs) into ABM introduces a
promising advancement, enhancing the capabilities of simulations [39]. LLM-based agents
offer three key advantages:
• Autonomy: LLMs enable agents to take actions without explicit instructions [40].
• Adaptive planning: Agents can make dynamic and context-aware decisions, closely
resembling human behaviour [41–43].
• Realistic interactions: LLM-driven agents can communicate effectively with both
humans and other agents, facilitating rich, language-based interactions [44].
By leveraging these capabilities, LLMs enhance agent-based simulations, enabling
more sophisticated and realistic representations of decision-making processes, communi-

===== PAGE 6 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 6 of 28
cation, and adaptive behaviour. This integration significantly improves the fidelity and
complexity of simulations, offering deeper insights into emergent system behaviours.
One of the key limitations of traditional ABM lies in the simplicity of rule-based or
neural network-driven agents, which often lack the intelligence to make optimal or con-
textually appropriate decisions [45]. Large language model-empowered agents overcome
this limitation by exhibiting advanced reasoning capabilities, enabling them to make in-
formed decisions and select appropriate actions within simulations. Moreover, these agents
enhance autonomy, a critical advantage in simulations characterized by uncertainty and
dynamic environments [46].
In agent-based modelling, systems often face continuous uncertainty and limited
controllability [16]. For example, in long-term social network simulations, the environment
and agent states may change significantly compared to the initial conditions [47]. To remain
effective, agents must adapt to evolving environments, formulating new decision policies
that can deviate considerably from their initial strategies.
The integration of LLMs into ABM has been explored across both virtual and real-
world environments.
Virtual environments: These simulations operate under predefined rules, such as
virtual social systems or prototype-level games. For instance, Qian et al. [ 48] designed
a virtual software company populated by agents assigned specific roles, such as CEOs,
managers, and programmers. Wang et al. [49] created a virtual recommender system where
agents browse recommended content and provide real-time feedback.
Real-world environments: LLM-powered agents are increasingly being applied to
simulate real-world scenarios. Li et al. [ 50] deployed agents to represent consumers
and workers within economic activities. Gur et al. [ 51] modelled real humans browsing
and interacting with online content. Xu et al. [ 52] developed LLM-driven agents to
simulate urban environments, capturing complex behaviours such as navigation, economic
decisions, and social interactions. Recently, Park et al. [ 53] demonstrated the potential
of LLMs through a virtual environment where 25 agents simulated daily activities using
adaptive planning and decision making. Although this model was generative and lacked
real-world validation, it highlighted LLMs’ potential to enhance ABM.
In a distinct application, Hua et al. [54] introduced WarAgent, an LLM-based multi-
agent system designed to simulate international relations and conflict scenarios. While
these studies offer valuable insights, they are often limited in scale, particularly when
compared to real-world social networks.
To address these challenges, we present the LLM-AIDSim framework, a scalable
approach that leverages LLMs to power a larger population of agents. This framework
provides a robust simulation of influence diffusion and social interactions across extensive
network structures.
In our previous work, Hu et al. introduced an LLM-Enhanced Agent-Based Simu-
lation Tool, we adapted both LLM and an influence diffusion model on the information
propagation task [55]. In this paper, we extend the IC model by integrating it with large
language models (LLMs) to simulate influence diffusion and language-level interactions
between users. This allows us to capture contextual and semantic nuances of users’ commu-
nications, addressing the gap in modelling real-time user behaviour in a social network. By
utilising an LLM-driven framework, we provide a more accurate and scalable simulation
of how influence propagates in large-scale networks, considering dynamic interactions and
language-based feedback.
Our approach offers a significant advancement in the field of influence diffusion, par-
ticularly for applications in dynamic social media environments, strategic communication,

===== PAGE 7 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 7 of 28
and misinformation control, where understanding both the quantitative and qualitative
aspects of influence propagation is crucial.
3. LLM-AIDSim Framework
Figure 1 illustrates the architecture of the LLM-AIDSim framework. The simulation
begins with the user interface (UI), where users can input parameters such as simulation
settings, diffusion model parameters, and the initial topic (detailed in Appendix B). Users
can either utilize previously generated user profiles or request new ones. The system
automatically saves the generated user profiles from the last simulation, which can be
reused in subsequent sessions. If new user profiles are generated, the simulation proceeds
through Loop 1, starting from step 1. Otherwise, it follows Loop 2, beginning at step 4.
The framework is composed of seven steps. In Loop 1, step 1 sends a request to
generate user profiles (see Appendix A for the detailed prompt). The generated user
profiles are saved (step 2) and used along with the initial topic messages in step 4 for
generating user agent responses via the Llama 3 large language model (LLM). If no new
user profiles are created, Loop 2 is used, and the framework employs the existing user
profiles and initial topic messages directly in step 4 for response generation.
Both loops utilize the Llama 3 LLM in step 4 to generate responses, including opinions,
phrases, and user responses, which are saved as output files. In step 6, the user agent sends
these responses to its neighbours in the social network, simulating the diffusion process.
Simultaneously, the responses are converted into vector embeddings using the BERT word
embedding algorithm [56] for further analysis.
Finally, in step 7, the generated responses, along with the initial messages, are itera-
tively used as inputs for the generation of subsequent user responses until the simulation
ends. At the conclusion of the simulation, the framework applies the K-means clustering
algorithm to analyse the discussion topics and generate a comprehensive report, accessible
through the UI.
Loop 1
UI Simulation parameters 
AND
Diffusion model parameters
Send profile generation requests
Request to
generate
user profile
LLM: llama3
Request to
generate
user responses
Initial
topic
Initial User
Profile
 Send response 
generation requests
Initial
topic
Generated
user profile
BERT Embedding
User Responses
Opinions
Phrases
User Responses
Using user response 
and 
initial topic message as an input to generate user response
Loop 2
Using the initial 
user profiles Send responses 
to neighbours
Save generated
information in file
Networks
Analyse
K-means TopicCluster
Algorithm
UI
Output Report
save data
Request to
update
user responses
If new
user profilesare generated
1
2
3
4
Use new
profiles
5
6
6
77
7
Figure 1. LLM-AIDSim framework.
4. LLM-Enhanced Agent-Based Influence Diffusion Model
LLM-AIDSim relies on our proposed LLM-enhanced Agent-based Influence Diffusion
model (LLM-AID). The LLM-AID model extends the conventional Independent Cascade
(IC) model. In the IC model, user agents can be in one of two states: active or inactive. An
inactive agent can be influenced by an active neighbour with a uniform probability, namely,

===== PAGE 8 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 8 of 28
the influence probability. The diffusion process continues until no more inactive agents can
be influenced. LLM-AID adopts this skeleton to describe influence diffusion.
Moreover, LLM-AID leverages agent-based modelling (ABM) to emphasise the unique
personalities and behaviours of individual agents. Each social network user is represented
as an autonomous agent with distinct traits and interactive behaviours, allowing them to
respond to information based on their personality and interactions. Specifically, the LLM
model “llama3:8b” is used to develop these agents, enhancing their ability to comprehend
and generate language-based responses.
4.1. Formal Definitions
We first introduce the formal definitions used in the LLM-AID model.
Definition 1. A social network G =< V, E > is a directed graph composed with a set of users
V = {v1, v2, . . . ,vn} and a set of edges E = {eij |1 ≤ i ≤ n, 1 ≤ j ≤ n, i ̸= j}.
Definition 2. A user agent vi represents a social network user.Γi = {Γin
i ∪ Γout
i } is the neighbour
set of vi, representing a collection of user agents that are connected to vi. Γi
in indicates the in-
neighbours from which vi can receive messages. Γi
out refers to the set of out-neighbours to which
vi can disseminate influence messages. A user has a user profile ri, a textual description of a user
agent. A user agent holds a repository R j = {Rin
j ∪ Rout
j }, as defined in Definition 4.
Definition 3. An influence message mx = (cx, vi) refers to a piece of textual information, where
cx is the content of the influence message, and vi denotes the user agent vi who sent the message.
Definition 4. A repository Rj = {Rin
j ∪ Rout
j } is a collection of influence messages which is
associated with a user agent vj. Particularly, Rin
j contains all incoming influence messages directed
towards the user agent vj. While Rout
j includes all outgoing influence messages sent from the user
agent vj.
4.2. LLM-Enhanced User Agent Model
Algorithm 1 provides the pseudocode of the diffusion process. Lines 1–9 initialise the
seed set S, the active user agent set A, and the newly active user agent set At, in which
user agents are influenced at the last time step. Lines 10–21 start the diffusion process.
Particularly, the user agents in the newly active user agent set At attempt to influence its
out-neighbours. The newly active user agent set At is updated at line 22. Lines 23–28
describe the evolution process of an active user agent that is not recently activated.
To break down, the diffusion process can be demonstrated as follows:
• The diffusion process unfolds over a limited number of discrete time steps T =
{0, 1, 2, . . . ,t}. A user agent can be in one of two statuses: active or inactive.
• At time step 0, all user agents are inactive. Each user agent in the social network has a
chance to receive a broadcast message ms with a broadcasting probability pb, thereby
becoming active. The user agents who receive this message are denoted as the initial
active user agents (or seeds).
• At time step t, an active user agent vi that was activated at time step t − 1 attempts to
activate each of its inactive out-neighbours vj ∈ Γi
out by sending an influence message
mx = ( cx, vi). The content cx of the influence message is its individual response to
the initial broadcast message ms. Each inactive user agent vj has a uniform influence
probability pi to be activated by an influence message. Once vj is influenced at time
step t, it is denoted as active and makes a response to the initial message ms based on
its personal profile ri and the received influence message mx.

===== PAGE 9 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 9 of 28
• At time step t, an active agent that was active at time step t − n, where n > 1, has
the opportunity to update its response to the initial message based on the current
responses from its active in-neighbours Γi
in. This process for user agents to update
responses is based on an evolution probability pe.
• The diffusion process stops once it reaches time step t. To ensure it aligns well with
the termination condition of the IC model, i.e., the diffusion process has no newly
activated users, and to ensure the model has sufficient time to evolve, we normally set
t as a large number.
Algorithm 1 LLM-Enhanced Agent-Based Influence Diffusion
Require: A social network G =< V, E >, an initial message ms, rounds R, time steps T, a
broadcasting probability pb, an influence probability pi, an evolution probability pe.
1: Initialise an empty user agent set S = ∅
2: for all vi ∈ V do
3: if a random number in [0, 1) < pb then
4: S = S ∪ {vi}
5: Store received message ms to repository Rin
i = Rin
i ∪ {ms}
6: end if
7: end for
8: Set newly active user agent set At = S
9: Set activated user agent set A = S
10: for t in range(0,T) do
11: Set a temporary influenced user agent set temp = ∅
12: for vi ∈ At do
13: Generate message mx = (cx, vi) towards the initial message ms.
14: Store generated response mx to post repository Rout
i = Rout
i ∪ {mx}
15: for vj ∈ Γi
out do
16: if a random number in [0, 1) < pi then
17: temp = temp ∪ {vj}
18: Rin
j = Rin
j ∪ {mx}
19: end if
20: end for
21: end for
22: At = temp
23: for va ∈ A \ At do
24: if a random number in [0, 1) < pe then
25: Update user response my = (cy, vi) towards the initial message ms.
26: Rin
a = Rin
a ∪ {my}
27: end if
28: end for
29: end for
At the beginning of influence diffusion, each user agent vi is assigned a unique
textual profile ri generated by an LLM model “llama3:8b” based on a predefined statistical
distribution. This profile includes fields such as name, location, age, gender, education,
occupation, and description. Additionally, each user agent has an equal broadcasting
probability pb of being selected as a seed user, which activates them at the start of the
diffusion process.
Once active, a user agent vi exhibits several interactive behaviours, including gener-
ating a language-level response to an incoming influence message mx and propagating it
to its out-neighbours Γi
out in the time step following its activation. In this phase, both the
user’s profile ri and the incoming message mx are incorporated into the prompt for the
LLM to generate a personalised response.

===== PAGE 10 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 10 of 28
An inactive user agent vj decides whether to be influenced by an incoming message
mx from one of its in-neighbours Γi
out. Each inactive agent can only be activated once. To
simplify this decision-making process, we adopt the approach from the IC model, assigning
a uniform influence probability pi and treating the decision as a random event.
Another important interactive behaviour of an active user agent is observing the
responses of its active in-neighbours and updating its own response based on the previous
one. This update process is also treated as a random event, with a uniform evolution
probability pe.
5. LLM-AIDSim: A Decision Support System via LLM-Enhanced
Agent-Based Influence Diffusion Simulation
This section introduces LLM-AIDSim, a simulation framework based on our pro-
posed LLM-AID model. LLM-AIDSim aims to simulate public responses to initial public
statements such as news articles, policy announcements, or public events. By providing
simulation results and their linguistic analysis, LLM-AIDSim demonstrates its ability to
support decision-makers with insightful information to help them understand potential
public reactions and adjust their strategies accordingly. A web-based visualisation tool was
developed at this stage for end-users to define simulation parameters based on their ad hoc
scenarios and to visualise the simulation.
Given a spreading influence message, the ideal output is a summary of a comprehen-
sive semantic analysis towards the public responses to the content of the message. The
public responses are composed of the messages posted by LLM-empowered user agents
who are influenced by the influence message.
5.1. Initialization
5.1.1. Network Construction
LLM-AIDSim supports two ways of constructing the social network: using a synthetic
network or using a real-world social network. The synthetic network is based on the Holme
and Kim algorithm [57]. This algorithm generates networks where the degree distribution
follows a power-law distribution, suggesting only a few nodes have a very high degree
while most have a relatively low degree. This is a universal phenomenon in real-world
social networks [58]. Three parameters are compulsory for setting up a synthetic network:
the node size n, the number of random edges m, and the triangle probability p for adding a
triangle after adding a random edge.
Meanwhile, this simulation application provides a conversion tool for users to conduct
simulations based on user-defined social networks. By providing the network topological
structure in a text format, the tool converts it to the format supported by the application.
5.1.2. User Profile Generation
User profiles are textual descriptions of a social network user. We adopt the Ollama
API using “llama3:8b” model to generate user profiles. If no contextual information is
given, the prompt is designed based on these rules: (1) A user profile is a description of a
social network user within 50 words. (2) The age of these users follows a normal Gaussian
distribution. (3) The gender of these users is half male and half female.
If the contextual information is given, the framework will generate the user profile
based on the given contextual information. The contextual information is the demographic
data collected from public census data 2. The age, gender, salary, education level, and
occupation factors are considered in the contextual information.

===== PAGE 11 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 11 of 28
5.1.3. Seed Selection
Unlike traditional influence diffusion models, which focus on selecting a specific set
of initial active users as seeds, our proposed diffusion model, LLM-AID, allows user agents
to have an equal probability of being randomly selected as seed users. This approach
aligns more closely with real-world message diffusion, where information is often spread
randomly, as messages can be read or shared by any user. In our system, these randomly
selected seeds represent real-world users who are exposed to and disseminate the message.
This equal probability is referred to as the broadcasting probability, representing the likeli-
hood of a user agent receiving a broadcast message. Additionally, to ensure consistency
across multiple rounds of simulations, the seed sets are fixed, using the set of seeds selected
during the first round of the simulation.
5.1.4. Parameter Settings
Two parameters control the initialisation of the simulation: rounds R and time steps T.
R is the number of iterations to run a simulation. Particularly, a larger R helps to account
for the inherent randomness brought by influence diffusion models, providing a more
accurate representation of the overall trend and behaviour of the diffusion process with the
averaged results. T is the time steps within one round of a simulation. T represents the
discrete intervals within each round of the simulation. In simulations, continuous time is
divided into these intervals to allow iterative calculations, with each time step capturing a
snapshot of the system’s state. The inclusion of multiple time steps in each round simulates
the progression of time in the real world during the diffusion process. Increasing T enables
the simulation to model dynamic response changes over a longer period, offering a more
detailed and realistic depiction of temporal dynamics.
Three diffusion model parameters control the process of the simulation. The LLM-
AIDSim users can adjust those three parameters to be suitable to their own use case: a
broadcasting probability pb represents the probability of each user agent receiving the
initial broadcasting message, an influence probability pi indicates the probability of a user
agent being influenced by one of its in-neighbours, and an evolution probability pe is the
percentage of the opportunity to update its response to the initial message based on the
current responses from its active in-neighbour Γi
in.
Two prompts are designed for the LLM-enhanced user agent to generate or update
responses with different considerations. The response generation prompt guides a user
agent to create a response to the initial message based on its personal profile and the
influence message that triggered it. The update prompt instructs the user agent to modify
its response to the initial message, taking into account its previous response and the
responses of its active in-neighbours.
5.2. Simulation
A web-based visualisation tool is developed for end-users to conduct simulations
based on their own needs. Figure 2 is the screenshot of a running simulation. The left side
of the web page contains the parameter setting component, where several parameters can
be adjusted. The right side displays the visualisation component, allowing the influence
diffusion process to be observed. Notably, the canvas is interactive: when the mouse hovers
over a node, it displays the most recent post of that user agent, and when clicked, it shows
the user profile of the agent.

===== PAGE 12 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 12 of 28
Figure 2. A screenshot of the Web-based visualisation tool.
5.3. Decision-Supporting Report
In this paper, we utilised BERT embedding to capture the semantic similarity between
comments and topics [56]. Devlin introduced how BERT’s contextual word embedding
allows for a more nuanced understanding of the text, which, combined with cosine sim-
ilarity, helps quantify how closely related two pieces of text are. In addition, we adopt
K-means clustering for grouping comments and discussions into distinct topic clusters.
This unsupervised learning method is a classic technique for finding patterns in data, often
used in topic modelling for social simulations [59].
• Evolution of topics: The report outlines how topics evolve over various time steps
across different locations. This enables users to monitor trends and changes in topic
discussions over time.
• Pie charts: For each specific location, pie charts are provided, which detail the topics
and their respective percentages. This visual format aids users in quickly understand-
ing the prominence of each topic within a location.
• Topic distribution table: A table listing the topic distributions for each location is
included. This table offers a comprehensive overview, allowing users to relate regional
contexts to variations in focus and interests effectively. It also supports an analysis
based on demographic, educational, and occupational data provided by users from
each region.
6. Experiments
6.1. Experiment Details
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our simulation framework, LLM-AIDSim, we
conducted four experiments using real-world news topics within a social network context.
Our quantitative analysis focuses on the following.
• Simulated vs. real-world comments: Analysing the differences between the simulated
comments generated by the LLM-AIDSim framework and real-world comments on
the same topics (see Section 6.3).
• Topic evolution and converge: Tracking the evolution of topics and the extent of
discussion converge in the LLM-AIDSim framework (see Section 6.4).
• Clustered topic analysis: Evaluating the clustered topics of the simulation model with
and without diffusion (see Section 6.5).

===== PAGE 13 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 13 of 28
• Framework performance across different demographics: Assessing the performance
of our framework across various population composition ratios and regional contexts
(see Section 6.6).
6.2. Experiments Settings
• Network parameters. In this experiment, we utilised a subset of the Stanford Network
Analysis Project (SNAP) group’s3 ego-Facebook dataset as our network nodes. The
SNAP group, led by Prof. Jure Leskovec, is a renowned research group at Stanford
University dedicated to studying large-scale networks and their applications in various
domains, including social networks, information networks, and biological networks.
In our study, the total number of nodes (representing individual users) is 333, and
the number of edges (representing connections or relationships between users) is
2500 [60]. This substantial dataset allowed us to analyse the network structure, identify
influential nodes, and explore various network properties and phenomena.
• Parameter settings. To maintain comparability across the three experiments, we
applied identical diffusion model parameters in each scenario. Specifically, the broad-
casting probability pb, the influence probability pi, and the evolution probability pe
were all set to 0.3. Similarly, the simulation parameters were consistent across the
experiments, with the number of rounds R set to 5 and the number of time steps T
established at 15. These settings ensured that each experiment was evaluated under
the same conditions, allowing for a fair comparison of results.
• Comment generation. In the context of large language models (LLMs), temperature
is a parameter used to control the randomness of the model’s output. It affects the
probability distribution from which the model samples the next word or token, and the
temperature range is from 0 to 1. In our study, all experiments were conducted using
the Ollama API, with the model version set to “llama3:8b” and a temperature setting
of 0 to disable the randomness completely; the purpose was to ensure reproducibility
and the most deterministic behaviour. The chosen model was selected for its superior
performance in providing accurate and consistent results. The use of APIs greatly
facilitates interaction with the model, streamlining the research process. In the experi-
ments, while generating the user profile, we utilised contextual information, including
three cities from two countries: “Auckland, New Zealand”, “Sydney, Australia”, and
“Hobart, Australia”.
• Real-world comments collection. A real-world dataset, the New York Times Articles
and Comments4, was utilized in this study. This dataset comprises all comments and
articles published by the New York Times between 1 January 2020 and 31 December
2020. For our experiment, we selected a subset corresponding to the article titled
“Should Wine Be Among Your Health Resolutions”5. The comments in this subset
were contributed by real-world users in response to the selected article. To generate
the initial topic content for our experiment, refer to Figure 3; we extracted the news
article from the dataset and employed the Llama 3 large language model to summarise
the article. The output summarised news content was used as the initial topic content
in the simulation process.
• Topic clustering. Figure 3 illustrates the process of the topic clustering. Firstly, we
employed the BERT model [56] to convert both real-world comments and simulated
comments into vectors. Secondly, we used the k-means clustering algorithm [59] to
group topics from real-world user comments and our simulated comments. The k-
means algorithm, a widely used and efficient unsupervised learning clustering method,
was employed to partition the comments into distinct clusters based on their content,
identifying the underlying themes that emerged from real and simulated discussions.

===== PAGE 14 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 14 of 28
Embedding Output
Converting
comments 
into vectors using
BERT 
Utilising k-means clustering 
algorithm to group topics
Output
Real-world
Topics
Simulated
Topics
 New York
 Times dataset
Embedding
Simulated
Comments
Real-world
comments
Summarised
News content
Extract News
article
Summarise 
New Article
LLM: llama3
Extract 
comments
Figure 3. Data processing workflow.
Evaluation Metrics
The semantic similarity between these clusters was then calculated using a state-of-the-
art language model, BERT. BERT allows for the generation of high-dimensional embedding
that captures the nuanced semantic meanings of the comments [56]. By leveraging BERT’s
contextual word representations, we converted each real-world topic and simulated topic
that was grouped by the k-means clustering algorithm into a fixed-length vector or embed-
ding, representing its semantic content. These vectors exist in the same semantic space,
ensuring consistency and comparability between real-world and simulated topics. Then,
the similarity between these embeddings was quantified using cosine similarity, a metric
that measures the cosine of the angle between two vectors in a multi-dimensional space.
Cosine similarity values approaching 1 signify a strong similarity between the vectors,
indicating a close alignment between the topics they represent.
6.3. Experiment 1: Comparison of Real-World Topics and Simulated Topics
Figure 4 illustrates the evolving semantic similarity across iterations between topics
extracted from real-world comments and those generated by simulations across three
distinct regions. The graph demonstrates how each iteration accumulates data from all
prior time steps, leveraging the highest similarity scores associated with each real-world
topic to compute the Maximum Average Similarity Score for every iteration.
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15
Step
0.68
0.70
0.72
0.74
0.76Average Maximum Similarity Score
Average Maximum Similarity Scores from Step 2 to Step 15
Hobart AU
Auckland NZ
Sydney AU
Figure 4. Cumulative evolution of topic similarity across iterations.

===== PAGE 15 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 15 of 28
As the iterations progress, the plot reveals an upward trend in the average maximum
similarity score, indicating that the simulated topics increasingly align with real-world
topics over time. This trend underscores the capability of our LLM-AIDSim framework to
generate topics that accurately reflect real user discussions, thereby enhancing the relevance
and scope of our simulations.
The consistent increase in similarity scores throughout the diffusion process high-
lights the dynamic and accumulative nature of our simulation approach. The broadening
converge of topics, along with the convergence towards higher similarity with real-world
discussions, attests to the realism and reliability of the LLM-AIDSim framework. The
ability of the framework to replicate the nuances and focal points of actual user discussions
is further evidenced by the uniform semantic similarities observed across different regions.
These findings validate the robustness and adaptability of the LLM-AIDSim frame-
work, emphasising its potential as a strategic tool for analysing and forecasting user engage-
ment and topic trends on social networks. Its utility extends to strategic communication
planning, where anticipating public responses and understanding evolving discussions
can significantly impact decision making and outcomes.
In the above experiments with the LLM-AIDSim framework, which leverages user
profiles to reflect topics from different cities, we conducted tests using three distinct sets of
user profiles. Additionally, we evaluated multiple large language models (LLMs) using
the same prompt applied in our LLM-AIDSim framework to generate simulated topics.
Unlike LLM-AIDSim, the LLMs cannot utilise user profiles, so only one set of results was
generated per LLM.
For the output topics of each LLM, we used the evaluation metrics method to compute
similarity scores between each real-world topic and its corresponding simulated topics.
The highest similarity score for each real-world topic was then selected to calculate the
Maximum Average Semantic Similarity Score for each LLM.
Table 1 presents the Maximum Average Similarity Score between real-world and
simulated topics without the diffusion technique. Among the five evaluated LLMs, GPT-4.0
achieved the highest performance with a score of 0.5897, while Jurassic-2 Ultra obtained
the lowest score of 0.5004. Notably, all these Maximum Average Similarity Scores are lower
than those observed at time step 2 in our LLM-AIDSim framework.
Table 1. Maximum Average Similarity score between real and simulated topics without diffusion.
LLM Name Maximum Average Similarity
GPT-4o 0.5897
Claude 3 Sonnet 0.5701
Llama3 8B 0.5700
Mistral Large 0.5697
Jurassic-2 Ultra 0.5004
In our LLM-AIDSim framework, we employed random seeds to facilitate influence
diffusion, resulting in a more diverse set of topics. By time step 2, multiple user agents
had been activated, leading to greater variation in the simulated topics. This demonstrates
the framework’s effectiveness in replicating real user behaviour and preferences, further
validating its utility in simulating complex social dynamics.
6.4. Experiment 2: Topic Evolution Tracking and Diffusion Convergence
The nodes in the images represent topics at each time step, and the flows between
nodes denote the similarity between the two topics. The similarity is calculated by taking
the cosine similarity of the embedding of a pair of topics, where the embedding is computed

===== PAGE 16 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 16 of 28
using the BERT model [56]. A wider and darker flow indicates a higher similarity between
the two topics. Only topics with a similarity score above 0.85 are shown to simplify
the visualisation.
As shown in Figure 5, the evolution of simulated topics in Sydney demonstrates how
our LLM-AIDSim framework enables topics to converge throughout the diffusion process.
From time step 2 to time step 15, broader discussions gradually split into more specific and
refined topics. For example, early themes such as “Finding a balance between wellness and
pleasure in modern trends and habits” evolved into more focused topics like “Exploring the
cultural significance of the ‘Clean wine’ trend” and “Celebrities’ influence on the popularity
of ‘clean wine’ and its cultural significance”. By time step 15, the topics converged towards
a unified consensus, emphasising quality and taste over perceived health benefits in wine,
showcasing the framework’s capacity to extract key social media consensus points as the
simulation progresses.
Figure 5. Topic evolution for Sydney, Australia.
Figure 6 illustrates the topic evolution for Auckland, New Zealand. Initially, the topics
centred on prioritising taste and quality over health claims and marketing gimmicks. As the
iterations advanced, the framework simulated the rise of the “clean wine” trend, focusing
on balancing health, quality, and tradition in the wine industry. By time step 15, the topics
settled on the appreciation of wine’s taste, quality, and cultural significance. This indicates
that our framework allows topics to mature and converge, aligning simulated discussions
with real-world consensus as diffusion progresses.
Figure 6. Topic evolution for Auckland, New Zealand.
In Figure 7, we observe the topic evolution for Hobart, Australia, where early discus-
sions focused on sustainable wine production and balancing quality with environmental
impact. As the simulation progressed, topics related to the rise of the “clean wine" trend
and its marketing strategies emerged. By the final time step, the discussions converged

===== PAGE 17 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 17 of 28
on themes of wine appreciation, craftsmanship, and the sensory experience of wine. This
demonstrates the framework’s ability to simulate how conversations shift towards more
representative, consensus-driven conclusions.
Figure 7. Topic evolution for Hobart, Australia.
What sets our LLM-AIDSim framework apart is its ability to simulate how social
media discussions evolve and converge into key consensus points over time. This capability
ensures that the conclusions drawn from the simulation are more representative and robust.
Furthermore, the framework’s adaptability allows us to incorporate demographic variations
across different regions. By using regional population data in our experiments, we were
able to demonstrate how the framework performs effectively across different parameter
settings, highlighting its robustness in handling diverse contexts.
While all three regions—Sydney, Auckland, and Hobart—shared a common focus
on wine appreciation, quality, and cultural significance over marketing tactics and health
benefits, there were subtle regional differences.
For instance, Sydney and Auckland emphasize the “clean wine” trend and its mar-
keting aspects, likely due to their similar educational demographics and occupational
structures. In contrast, discussions in Hobart focus more on sustainable production prac-
tices and quality control, which may be attributed to the city’s higher education levels and
a greater proportion of individuals in professional or managerial roles. These regional
variations underscore the framework’s adaptability to diverse demographic dynamics,
enabling it to generate insightful and region-specific thematic evolutions.
The results from these experiments demonstrate that the LLM-AIDSim framework not
only simulates discussions that converge towards widely accepted social media narratives
but also excels in simulating regional differences with the same level of accuracy and repre-
sentativeness. This highlights the framework’s potential as a powerful tool for studying
social media dynamics across diverse regions and demographic groups.
6.5. Experiment 3: Comparison of Results with and Without Diffusion
In this experiment, we analyse the differences in topics extracted from user agents
before and after diffusion, demonstrating the advantages of our LLM-AIDSim framework.
Figures 8–13 show that in the absence of diffusion, users exhibit a wider range of opinions.
However, after diffusion, the diversity of opinions is significantly reduced, showcasing
the impact of the diffusion mechanism on consolidating user-generated content. This
experiment highlights the ability of our framework to model the social influence process,
where discussions shift toward dominant narratives.
The comparison of topic clusters across the three regions (Sydney, Auckland, and
Hobart) reveals several key patterns. Post-diffusion, the clustering of topics shows a
noticeable consolidation, where fewer topics dominate the conversation. This illustrates

===== PAGE 18 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 18 of 28
how LLM-AIDSim effectively captures the dynamics of influence diffusion, in which
collective attention becomes focused on a smaller set of prevailing topics.
In Sydney, for instance, topic 2, “The Rise of Clean Wine: Trends, Marketing, and the
Future of Wine Enthusiasm”, and topic 5, “Wine Appreciation: Emphasising Quality, Crafts-
manship, and Cultural Significance Over Marketing Gimmicks”, collectively account for
over 50% of the discussion after diffusion. Similarly, in Auckland, post-diffusion analysis
reveals that topic 2 (“Appreciating the Art of Winemaking and Its Cultural Significance”)
and topic 3 (“Wine Appreciation: Valuing Taste, Quality, and Cultural Significance”) domi-
nate the discourse, representing 46% of the conversation. In Hobart, topic 1 (“Prioritising
Quality Over Health Benefits in Wellness Trends”) and topic 3 (“The Joy and Significance
of Wine Appreciation”) emerge as the dominant topics, accounting for more than 44% of
the discussion.
Across all regions, the diffusion process consolidates discussions about a few key
topics, suggesting that our framework accurately simulates the influence of social networks
in narrowing the focus of public discourse. As diffusion progresses, discussions converge
on central themes, likely influenced by key actors or prevailing opinions within the network.
Furthermore, the reduction in diversity between pre- and post-diffusion topic clus-
ters underscores the importance of accounting for social influence in modelling public
discourse. Before diffusion, topic clusters in each region cover a broad spectrum of user
interests, including themes such as sustainability, wellness, and celebrity endorsements.
For instance, in Sydney, topics related to health, wellness, and wine culture are more evenly
distributed prior to diffusion. In Auckland, there are discussions about local winemaking,
environmental impact, and balancing quality with health benefits. In Hobart, the topics
range from craftsmanship to sustainability and wine appreciation.
Through the diffusion process, our framework demonstrates its ability to reflect
the natural reduction in topic diversity that typically occurs in social networks. Certain
narratives are amplified, while others are diminished, as social influence drives collective
attention toward a limited set of dominant themes.
In conclusion, this experiment demonstrates that the comparison between topics
extracted without and with diffusion reveals the significant impact of the diffusion process
on topic clustering within a simulated social network. Initially, without diffusion, the
topic clustering reflects a broad spectrum of user interests, encompassing diverse themes
and perspectives. After diffusion, the discussions become concentrated around a few
dominant topics, mirroring real-world network dynamics, where social influence amplifies
specific narratives.
6.3%
Topic 1
5.5%
Topic 2
11.0%
Topic 3
6.9%
Topic 4
2.0%
Topic 5 15.4%
Topic 6
7.4%
Topic 7
2.1%
Topic 8
6.0%
Topic 9
2.8%
Topic 10
8.9%
Topic 11
3.8%
Topic 12
17.7%
Topic 13
4.2%
Topic 14
Topic 1: Appreciation for craftsmanship, attention to detail, and artistry in winemaking.
Topic 2: Finding balance between wellness and pleasure in modern trends and habits.
Topic 3: Balancing Wellness Trends with Appreciation for Wine Culture and Artistry
Topic 4: Finding a balance between wellness, indulgence, and appreciation for life's simple pleasures.
Topic 5: Author's viewpoint on a particular topic receives unanimous agreement.
Topic 6: The rise of clean wine: trend, marketing tactics, and sustainability in the industry.
Topic 7: Appreciating wine for its taste, quality, and craftsmanship is essential.
Topic 8: Supporting Local Wine Shops: A Passionate Plea for Authenticity and Community
Topic 9: Finding balance between enjoying good wine and prioritizing overall wellbeing.
Topic 10: Influence of celebrity endorsements on consumer behavior and purchasing decisions.
Topic 11: Balancing Quality, Taste, and Tradition: Navigating the World of Wine Appreciation
Topic 12: Celebrities like Cameron Diaz Promote Clean Wine, but Does it Matter?
Topic 13: Wine appreciation: Prioritizing taste, quality, and cultural significance over perceived health benefits.
Topic 14: Balancing Taste, Quality, and Health Benefits in Beverage Consumption Habits
Sydney, Australia: Step 2
Figure 8. Topic clusters of Sydney without diffusion.

===== PAGE 19 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 19 of 28
3.8%
Topic 1
20.7%
Topic 2
25.1%
Topic 3
8.4%
Topic 4
29.2%
Topic 5
12.8%
Topic 6
Topic 1: Celebrities like Cameron Diaz popularizing 'clean wine' trend, influencing consumer behavior
Topic 2: The Rise of Clean Wine: Trends, Marketing, and the Future of Wine Enthusiasm
Topic 3: Prioritizing quality and taste over perceived health benefits in the world of wine.
Topic 4: The importance of balancing taste, quality, and health benefits in consumer preferences.
Topic 5: Wine Appreciation: Emphasizing Quality, Craftsmanship, and Cultural Significance Over Marketing Gimmicks
Topic 6: Appreciating Quality Over Quantity in Food and Drink Industry Trends
Sydney, Australia: Step 15
Figure 9. Topic clusters of Sydney with diffusion.
6.5%
Topic 1
3.0%
Topic 2
2.2%
Topic 3
3.3%
Topic 4
3.5%
Topic 5
1.8%
Topic 6
23.1%
Topic 7
12.3%
Topic 8
1.4%
Topic 9
5.2%
Topic 10
3.4%
Topic 11
5.0%
Topic 12
5.2%
Topic 13
2.3%
Topic 14
5.1%
Topic 15
4.3%
Topic 164.6%
Topic 17
7.8%
Topic 18
Topic 1: Is the rise of 'clean wine' a wellness trend or just a marketing fad?
Topic 2: Finding balance between enjoying good wine and prioritizing overall wellbeing.
Topic 3: Considering Environmental Impact of Wine Production When Advocating for Good Wine Shops
Topic 4: Trying new wines and exploring local winemakers' stories and craftsmanship.
Topic 5: Appreciating the Artistry Behind Good Wine, Beyond Health Benefits.
Topic 6: Author's Stance and Sentiment: Agreement or Partial Disagreement
Topic 7: Appreciating Wine: Taste, Quality, or Health Benefits?
Topic 8: Appreciating good wine: Prioritizing taste and quality over health benefits and marketing gimmicks.
Topic 9: Finding balance in life and decision-making to achieve harmony.
Topic 10: Prioritizing Taste and Quality Over Health Benefits in Food Consumption
Topic 11: Importance of Supporting Local Wine Shops and Small Businesses
Topic 12: Appreciation for fine wine and social bonding over a shared glass.
Topic 13: Appreciating Wine for Its Taste and Quality Over Marketing Hype
Topic 14: Prioritizing Quality Over Health Benefits: A Middle Ground Solution for Sustainable Practices
Topic 15: Celebrities' influence on consumer behavior: prioritizing expertise over fads
Topic 16: Celebrity influence on drinking habits: Cameron Diaz's clean wine promotion
Topic 17: Finding Balance Between Wellness and Pleasure in a World of Trends
Topic 18: Wine appreciation: Balancing taste, quality, and cultural heritage in a nuanced understanding.
Auckland, New Zealand: Step 2
Figure 10. Topic clusters of Auckland without diffusion.
15.8%
Topic 1
20.9%
Topic 2
26.9%
Topic 3
7.6%
Topic 4
12.6%
Topic 5
12.8%
Topic 6
3.4%
Topic 7
Topic 1: Clean Wine Trend: Balancing Health, Artistry, and Quality in Fine Wines
Topic 2: Appreciating the Art of Winemaking and Its Cultural Significance
Topic 3: Wine appreciation: valuing taste, quality, and cultural significance over perceived health benefits.
Topic 4: Prioritizing taste and quality over health benefits in the wellness trend.
Topic 5: Appreciating Wine for Its Taste, Quality, and Cultural Significance
Topic 6: Embracing Quality Over Quantity: Balancing Taste and Craftsmanship in Products.
Topic 7: Celebrities like Cameron Diaz promote clean wine for health benefits and quality
Auckland, New Zealand: Step 15
Figure 11. Topic clusters of Auckland with diffusion.
2.1%
Topic 1
5.8%
Topic 2
1.0%
Topic 3
6.2%
Topic 4
3.0%
Topic 5
4.7%
Topic 6
13.4%
Topic 7 4.5%
Topic 8
7.5%
Topic 9
4.4%
Topic 10
1.4%
Topic 11
6.7%
Topic 12
5.9%
Topic 13
0.6%
Topic 14
4.3%
Topic 15
16.8%
Topic 16
1.5%
Topic 173.8%
Topic 18
6.4%
Topic 19
Topic 1: Sustainable wine production methods: balancing quality with environmental impact
Topic 2: Appreciation for craftsmanship and quality in wine, whether artisanal or mass-produced.
Topic 3: Strongly Agreeing with Author's Perspective
Topic 4: Wine's cultural significance in wellness trends, balancing health benefits with quality and taste.
Topic 5: Celebrities like Cameron Diaz popularizing clean wine, promoting healthier drinking habits.
Topic 6: Prioritizing taste and quality over health benefits in everyday life.
Topic 7: The pros and cons of the clean wine trend in the wine industry.
Topic 8: Appreciating the Artistry Behind Wine, Not Just Its Health Benefits.
Topic 9: Appreciating quality over perceived health benefits in the wellness trend
Topic 10: Value of quality over marketing gimmicks in consumer purchasing decisions.
Topic 11: Importance of finding balance in life for overall well-being and moderation.
Topic 12: Wine Appreciation: Focus on Quality and Taste, Not Just Marketing Spin
Topic 13: Wine can bring people together, creating meaningful experiences and memorable moments.
Topic 14: Finding a balance or middle ground between two competing options.
Topic 15: Balancing Enjoyment and Responsibility: Finding a Balance Between Indulging and Taking Care of Ourselves
Topic 16: Appreciating Wine for Taste and Quality Over Health Benefits
Topic 17: Appreciation for good taste and quality in drinking, particularly wine.
Topic 18: Supporting Local Wine Shops and Winemakers Over Buying from Big Companies.
Topic 19: Balancing appreciation for wine's taste, quality, and cultural significance with health concerns.
Hobart, Australia: Step 2
Figure 12. Topic clusters of Hobart without diffusion.

===== PAGE 20 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 20 of 28
These findings highlight the importance of accounting for diffusion effects when
modelling and interpreting social responses to news, opinions, and topics in real-world
environments. By incorporating diffusion, our LLM-AIDSim framework captures how
collective discourse is shaped by social interaction and influence, providing valuable
insights into the mechanisms behind topic convergence and consensus formation.
7.5%
Topic 1
18.9%
Topic 2
21.1%
Topic 3
13.8%
Topic 4
9.1%
Topic 5
23.5%
Topic 6
6.1%
Topic 7
Topic 1: Prioritizing quality over health benefits in a nuanced approach to wellness trends.
Topic 2: The rise of clean wine: trends, marketing, and quality control.
Topic 3: The Joy and Significance of Wine Appreciation: Embracing Quality and Tradition
Topic 4: The Artistry Behind Wine: Appreciating Craftsmanship, Quality, and Tradition
Topic 5: Finding Balance and Pleasure in Life through Simple Enjoyments.
Topic 6: Wine appreciation should focus on quality, craftsmanship, and cultural significance over health benefits.
Topic 7: Appreciation and indulgence in quality craft products, including beer and wine.
Hobart, Australia: Step 15
Figure 13. Topic clusters of Hobart with diffusion.
6.6. Experiment 4: Comparison of Simulation Results from Different Regions
In this experiment, we focus on comparing the simulation results from different
regions, namely, Sydney, Auckland, and Hobart. The goal of this experiment is not just to
analyse the simulated topics within the regions but to demonstrate the adaptability and
strengths of our LLM-AIDSim framework when applied across diverse demographic and
regional contexts, the results are illustrated in Tables 2–4. By incorporating population,
income, and educational data into our simulations (Appendix C), we emphasise how the
framework remains robust across varying parameters.
The critical feature of our framework is that topics tend to converge during the
diffusion process. Over time, the discussions narrow down to a few dominant topics,
reflecting a form of consensus. This behaviour highlights one of the core advantages of the
LLM-AIDSim framework: its ability to replicate real-world social consensus-building while
accounting for regional differences. The diffusion process inherently reduces the diversity
of topics, but this convergence leads to more representative and compelling outcomes,
particularly when modelling social networks.
Table 2. Sydney, Australia: Topic distribution.
Topic No. Topic Percentage
Topic 5 Wine appreciation: emphasising quality, craftsmanship, and cultural significance over
marketing gimmicks 29.2%
Topic 3 Prioritising quality and taste over perceived health benefits in the world of wine 25.1%
Topic 2 The rise of clean wine: trends, marketing, and the future of wine enthusiasm 20.7%
Topic 6 Appreciating quality over quantity in food and drink industry trends 12.8%
Topic 4 The importance of balancing taste, quality, and health benefits in consumer preferences 8.4%
Topic 1 Celebrities like Cameron Diaz popularising the ‘clean wine’ trend, influencing
consumer behaviour 3.8%
Another key advantage of our framework is its flexibility. By incorporating the unique
population structures of different regions, we have demonstrated that our model performs
well across various scenarios. For instance, the demographic composition in Sydney is
characterised by a large working-age population, with a high percentage of professionals
and well-educated individuals, which influences the emergence of topics around health-

===== PAGE 21 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 21 of 28
conscious behaviours and artisanal products. In Auckland, the focus shifts more towards
wine appreciation and cultural significance, likely due to the younger population and high
levels of educational attainment. Meanwhile, in Hobart, the emphasis is on balancing
quality with wellness trends, reflecting the local community’s preference for sustainable
and high-quality products.
Table 3. Auckland, New Zealand: Topic distribution.
Topic No. Topic Percentage
Topic 3 Wine appreciation: valuing taste, quality, and cultural significance over perceived
health benefits 26.9%
Topic 2 Appreciating the art of winemaking and its cultural significance 20.9%
Topic 1 Clean wine trend: balancing health, artistry, and quality in fine wines 15.8%
Topic 5 Appreciating wine for its taste, quality, and cultural significance 12.6%
Topic 6 Embracing quality over quantity: balancing taste and craftsmanship in products 12.8%
Topic 4 Prioritising taste and quality over health benefits in the wellness trend 7.6%
Topic 7 Celebrities like Cameron Diaz promote clean wine for health benefits and quality 3.4%
Table 4. Hobart, Australia: Topic distribution.
Topic No. Topic Percentage
Topic 6 Appreciating wine for quality, taste, and craftsmanship over just its health benefits 23.5%
Topic 3 Appreciating good wine for its taste, quality, and cultural significance 21.1%
Topic 2 Wine quality vs. clean wine trend: balancing tradition with modernity 18.9%
Topic 4 Wine appreciation: celebrating artistry, craftsmanship, and unique characteristics 13.8%
Topic 5 Finding balance and pleasure in life through mindfulness and moderate indulgence 9.1%
Topic 1 The importance of prioritising quality over perceived health benefits in product
development and marketing 7.5%
Topic 7 The importance of quality and taste in appreciating good craftsmanship 6.1%
In conclusion, Experiment 4 illustrates the versatility and adaptability of our LLM-
AIDSim framework in generating realistic simulations of social influence diffusion across
different regions. The framework not only simulates the dynamics of topic convergence but
also highlights how regional contexts influence the specific themes that emerge during the
diffusion process. These findings validate the robustness of our approach in capturing social
dynamics and underscore its potential utility for strategic communication and predictive
analysis in social networks.
6.7. Experiment Summary
Through our detailed analysis of simulated diffusion processes, we have demonstrated
that social influence plays a pivotal role in consolidating discussions about a smaller set
of dominant topics, particularly in the post-diffusion stages. This outcome highlights the
effectiveness of our LLM-AIDSim framework in modelling how social dynamics shape
collective discourse. As certain narratives gain prominence, others recede, reflecting the
real-world behaviour of opinion formation and consensus-building in social networks.
The regional variations observed across Sydney, Auckland, and Hobart underscore the
adaptability of our framework in accounting for demographic, economic, and cultural fac-
tors. In Sydney, the focus on health-conscious behaviours and artisanal products, driven by
a professional, well-educated demographic, led to the dominance of topics related to clean
wine and wine appreciation. In Auckland, with its younger, highly educated population,
topics emphasising cultural significance and the art of winemaking took precedence. Mean-
while, in Hobart, the local preference for balancing quality with wellness and sustainability
led to topics centred on the appreciation of craftsmanship and mindful consumption.

===== PAGE 22 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 22 of 28
These findings validate the robustness of our framework in capturing the nuances
of regional public discourse. By simulating the influence diffusion process across diverse
demographic and socioeconomic landscapes, we provide insights into how collective
opinions are shaped, consolidated, and influenced by social interactions. The LLM-AIDSim
framework thus proves to be a versatile tool, capable of modelling and predicting topic
trends across various contexts, making it invaluable for strategic communication, trend
analysis, and understanding social dynamics in real-world environments.
7. Conclusions and Future Work
In this paper, we present the LLM-AIDSim framework, an innovative approach that
incorporates large language models (LLMs) into agent-based simulations for influence
diffusion. This framework enables agents to generate language-level responses, signif-
icantly enhancing the realism of insights into user agent behaviour during information
diffusion. This integration effectively bridges the gap between traditional numerical simu-
lation results and the textual nuances typical in real-world discussions. Through a series
of experiments, LLM-AIDSim has been shown to accurately simulate user interactions
and the evolution of topics within social networks, yielding results that align closely with
actual behaviours and discussions, as confirmed by high semantic similarity scores across
various regions.
The LLM-AIDSim framework distinguishes itself by facilitating dynamic simulations
in which agent responses adapt based on ongoing discussions. This feature not only cap-
tures the intricate nature of communication within social networks but also yields practical
insights for strategic communication planning. The fidelity of the simulation results to
real-world data highlights the framework’s potential utility across a broad spectrum of ap-
plications, from marketing strategies to public policy development. These capabilities make
LLM-AIDSim an invaluable tool for researchers and practitioners aiming to understand
and influence public opinion and behaviour in complex social environments.
While LLM-AIDSim provides valuable insights into the dynamics of influence diffu-
sion, there are several avenues for future research and enhancement:
• One key area for future work is to explore how modifications to the original news
article impact user behaviour, particularly in terms of the sentiment and concerns
expressed in user comments. This suggests that certain alterations to the content or
framing of the news can potentially reduce the number of negative users.
• Scalability and performance optimisation: As the complexity and scale of social
networks grow, it is essential to explore methods to optimise the computational
efficiency of LLM-based simulations. Incorporating distributed computing or more
lightweight LLM architectures could allow for simulations at a much larger scale.
• Agent behaviour customisation: While this study employed LLM-generated responses
to simulate human behaviour, there is room for improvement in agent customisation.
Future work could allow for more detailed user profiles and behaviour models based
on specific sociocultural, political, and psychological factors.
• Enhanced linguistic analysis: While the current framework utilises BERT-based embed-
dings [56] to measure semantic similarity, future research could benefit from exploring
both advanced linguistic models and qualitative interpretive methods. Advanced
models, such as those based on the latest developments in deep learning, could im-
prove the numerical representation of content and tone. At the same time, drawing
from the qualitative, interpretive tradition of empirical social research offers com-
plementary avenues for understanding. For instance, simulated narratives could be
analysed using sequence analytical procedures inspired by objective hermeneutics [61].
This dual approach could enrich insights into the discussions by combining the pre-

===== PAGE 23 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 23 of 28
cision of numerical embeddings with the depth of interpretive methods, fostering a
more holistic understanding of social dynamics in simulations.
By addressing these areas, LLM-AIDSim could become a more robust and flexible
tool for modelling complex social dynamics, contributing to both academic research and
practical applications in strategic communication, marketing, and public policy.
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, L.Z. and Y.H.; methodology, L.Z. and Y.H.; software, L.Z.
and Y.H.; validation L.Z., Y.H., W.L. and Q.B.; formal analysis L.Z. and Y.H.; investigation, L.Z. and
Y.H.; writing—original draft preparation, L.Z. and Y.H.; writing—review and editing, W.L., Q.B. and
P .N.; visualization, L.Z. and Y.H.; supervision W.L., Q.B. and P .N. All authors have read and agreed
to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Data Availability Statement: The data that support the findings of this study are available from the
corresponding author upon reasonable request.
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Abbreviations
The following abbreviations are used in this manuscript:
LLM-AIDSim LLM-Enhanced Agent-Based Influence Diffusion Simulation
ABM Agent-based modelling
IC Independent Cascade
DC Decreasing Cascade
LLMs Large language models
Appendix A. Prompt
Appendix A.1. Prompt Used for Generating User Profile
Generate user profiles as a 50-word unique description. The ages of these users follow
a Gaussian distribution, and gender is equally distributed. List the responses by user ID,
starting with ‘N’, in JSON format. Use the following example as a guide:
" N1 ": {
" name ": " Emily " ,
" age ": 32 ,
" gender ": " female " ,
" d e s c r i p t i o n ": " A p a s s i o n a t e artist who loves e x p r e s s i n g
herself through pa in tin gs . She finds i n s p i r a t i o n in
nature and often exhibits her artwork in local
ga ll er ie s ."
}
An example of generated user profile:
{
" N1 ": {
" Name ": " Liam " ,
" Location ": " Auckland , New Zealand " ,
" Age ": "41" ,
" Gender ": " Male " ,
" Ed uc at io n ": " Master ’ s degree " ,
" O c c u p a t i o n ": " Manager " ,

===== PAGE 24 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 24 of 28
" D e s c r i p t i o n ": " Liam is a driven manager who enjoys
leading teams to success . He loves playing rugby
in his free time and is an avid fan of the All
Blacks ."
}
}
Appendix A.2. Prompt Used for Generating User Response
We are building an influence discussion simulation tool, you are a responsible AI,
and your task is based on each user’s profile, adapt the user’s post habit and generate one
comment on the topic you received. The format and content should follow the following
3 instructions. Please note, do not generate duplicate sentences from different users. One
profile represents one user and one possible comment only. Based on the USER_PROFILE,
given the user’s last received influence message LAST_POST_MESSAGE, given the topic
‘topic’, please perform the following tasks and provide the responses in JSON format:
{
1. Generate one of the user ’ s possible comments while the
user reading this topic , in this format : ’ Response :
[ User ’ s response ] ’ , each response cannot be the same .
2. Do a semantic analysis based on the response g en er at ed
from 1 , output the results as this user ’ s opinion in
the format of : ’ opinion : [ Support / Oppose / Neutral ] ’
3. S um ma riz e the user ’ s response and generate the
response in the format : ’ phrases : [ List of phrases ] ’
Please only return the r esp on se s in the fo ll ow in g JSON
format , one response only for each profile :
{
" response ": "[ User ’ s response ]" ,
" opinion ": "[ Support / Oppose / Neutral ]" ,
" phrases ": "[ List of phrases ]"
}
}
An example of generated user response:
{
" response ": " I agree that wine ’ s taste and quality
should be a p p r e c i a t e d . As someone who loves o r g a n i z i n g
events , I ’ ve seen how ’ clean wine ’ has become trendy
in social g a t h e r i n g s . While it ’ s great to p r i o r i t i z e
health , I think it ’ s also i mpo rt an t to consider the
cultural aspect of enjoying a good glass of wine .
After all , life is about balance ! " ,
" opinion ": " Support " ,
" phrases ": [
" I agree " ,
" p r i o r i t i z e the cultural aspect " ,
" life is about balance "
]
}

===== PAGE 25 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 25 of 28
Appendix B. Initial Topic
Summarizing the initial topic used in this paper: The article discusses the rise of
‘clean wine’, popularised by celebrities like Cameron Diaz, as part of the wellness trend.
While marketed as healthier, the author argues that wine should be appreciated for its taste
and quality, cautioning against the overemphasis on health benefits and advocating for
buying from good wine shops.
Appendix C. Population Information for Different Regions
Table A1. Demographic, income, education, and occupation comparison between Hobart, Auckland,
and Sydney.
Category Hobart, Australia Auckland, New Zealand Sydney, Australia
Population
Working-age population:
68.5% Median age: 34.7 Working-age population:
64.6%
Males: 48.94% Males: 49.43% Males: 49.71%
Females: 50.98% Females: 50.57% Females: 50.28%
Personal Weekly Income
NZD 1–499: 20.9% NZD 1–499: 6.2% NZD 1–499: 20.4%
NZD 500–999: 23% NZD 500–999: 4.9% NZD 500–999: 20.3%
NZD 1000–1999: 27.8% NZD 1000–1999: 6.4% NZD 1000–1999: 26.4%
NZD 2000–2999: 8.9% NZD 2000–2999: 8.1% NZD 2000–2999: 8.9%
NZD 3000 or more: 6.1% NZD 3000 or more: 6.5% NZD 3000 or more: 7.1%
Nil income: 7.6% Nil income: 8.7% Nil income: 9.7%
Negative income: 0.4% Loss: 0.6% Negative income: 0.7%
Inadequately
described/not stated: 5.4%
Inadequately
described/not stated: 8.7%
Inadequately
described/not stated: 6.5%
Education
Secondary school or lower:
18.9% No qualification: 14.5% Secondary school or lower:
26.2%
Postgraduate degree:
16.7%
Post-graduate and honours
degrees: 6.6% Postgraduate degree: 9.4%
Graduate
diploma/certificate: 4.5% Master’s degree: 5.0% Graduate
diploma/certificate: 2.1%
Bachelor degree: 27.8% Bachelor’s degree: 18.6% Bachelor degree: 21.8%
Advanced
diploma/diploma: 8.1% Level 5 diploma: 4.7% Advanced
diploma/diploma: 9.7%
Certificate: 10.6% Level 3 certificate: 11.5% Certificate: 14.8%
Inadequately described:
0.7%
Inadequately described:
0.7%
Inadequately described:
0.8%
Not stated: 6.0% Not stated: 6.0% Not stated: 7.2%
Occupation
Managers: 14.3% Managers: 18.1% Managers: 15.2%
Professionals: 36.7% Professionals: 25.9% Professionals: 29.3%
Technicians/trades
workers: 8.8%
Technicians/trade workers:
11.4%
Technicians/trades
workers: 10.5%
Community/personal
service workers: 12.8%
Community/personal
service workers: 9.1%
Community/personal
service workers: 9.3%
Clerical/administrative
workers: 10.7%
Clerical/administrative
workers: 11.7%
Clerical/administrative
workers: 13.8%
Sales workers: 7.1% Sales workers: 10.0% Sales workers: 7.8%
Machinery
operators/drivers: 2.0%
Machinery
operators/drivers: 5.9%
Machinery
operators/drivers: 5.6%
Labourers: 6.1% Labourers: 7.9% Labourers: 6.8%

===== PAGE 26 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 26 of 28
Notes
1 https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/benjaminawd/new-york-times-articles-comments-2020?select=nyt-comments-part1.csv (ac-
cessed on 29 May 2024)
2 https://www.abs.gov.au/census (accessed on 10 March 2024); https://www.stats.govt.nz/topics/census (accessed on 16
June 2024).
3 http://snap.stanford.edu/ (accessed on 10 March 2024).
4 https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/benjaminawd/new-york-times-articles-comments-2020?select=nyt-comments-part1.csv (ac-
cessed on 8 April 2024).
5 https://www.nytimes.com/2020/12/31/dining/drinks/clean-wine-avaline.html (accessed on 8 April 2024).
References
1. Prasetya, H.A.; Murata, T. A model of opinion and propagation structure polarization in social media. Comput. Soc. Netw. 2020,
7, 1–35. [CrossRef]
2. Li, W.; Hu, Y.; Jiang, C.; Wu, S.; Bai, Q.; Lai, E. ABEM: An adaptive agent-based evolutionary approach for influence maximization
in dynamic social networks. Appl. Soft Comput. 2023, 136, 110062. [CrossRef]
3. Hu, Y.; Wu, S.; Jiang, C.; Li, W.; Bai, Q.; Roehrer, E. AI Facilitated Isolations? The Impact of Recommendation-based Influence
Diffusion in Human Society. In Proceedings of the IJCAI,Vienna, Austria, 23–29 July 2022; pp. 5080–5086.
4. Zhang, L.; Wang, T.; Jin, Z.; Su, N.; Zhao, C.; He, Y. The research on social networks public opinion propagation influence models
and its controllability. China Commun. 2018, 15, 98–110. [CrossRef]
5. Kanso, A.M.; Nelson, R.A.; Kitchen, P .J. BP and the Deepwater Horizon oil spill: A case study of how company management
employed public relations to restore a damaged brand. J. Mark. Commun. 2020, 26, 703–731. [CrossRef]
6. Franks, D.W.; Noble, J.; Kaufmann, P .; Stagl, S. Extremism propagation in social networks with hubs. Adapt. Behav. 2008,
16, 264–274. [CrossRef]
7. Kempe, D.; Kleinberg, J.; Tardos, É. Maximizing the spread of influence through a social network. In Proceedings of the Ninth
ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Washington, DC, USA, 24–27 August 2003;
pp. 137–146.
8. Li, Y.; Chen, W.; Wang, Y.; Zhang, Z.L. Influence diffusion dynamics and influence maximization in social networks with friend
and foe relationships. In Proceedings of the Sixth ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining, Rome, Italy,
4–8 February 2013; pp. 657–666.
9. Wang, G.; Li, W.; Bai, Q.; Lai, E.M. Maximizing Social Influence With Minimum Information Alteration. IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top.
Comput. 2023, 12, 419–431. [CrossRef]
10. Kong, F.; Xie, J.; Wang, B.; Yao, T.; Li, S. Online Influence Maximization under Decreasing Cascade Model. arXiv 2023,
arXiv:2305.15428.
11. Zhu, W.; Miao, Y.; Yang, S.; Lian, Z.; Cui, L. Maximizing Influence in Temporal Social Networks: A Node Feature-Aware Voting
Algorithm. Comput. Mater. Contin. 2023, 77. [CrossRef]
12. Kumar, S.; Mallik, A.; Khetarpal, A.; Panda, B.S. Influence maximization in social networks using graph embedding and graph
neural network. Inf. Sci. 2022, 607, 1617–1636. [CrossRef]
13. Liu, C.; Xu, H.; Liu, X. Online influence maximization under continuous independent cascade model with node-edge-level
feedback. Knowl. Inf. Syst. 2024, 66, 1091–1110. [CrossRef]
14. Saito, K.; Nakano, R.; Kimura, M. Prediction of information diffusion probabilities for independent cascade model. In Proceedings
of the International Conference on Knowledge-Based and Intelligent Information and Engineering Systems, Zagreb, Croatia, 3–5
September 2008; pp. 67–75.
15. Li, W.; Bai, Q.; Liang, L.; Yang, Y.; Hu, Y.; Zhang, M. Social influence minimization based on context-aware multiple influences
diffusion model. Knowl.-Based Syst. 2021, 227, 107233. [CrossRef]
16. Macal, C.M.; North, M.J. Tutorial on agent-based modeling and simulation. In Proceedings of the Winter Simulation Conference,
Orlando, FL, USA, 4–7 December 2005.
17. Janssen, M.A. Agent-based modelling. Model. Ecol. Econ. 2005, 155, 172–181.
18. Luo, L.; Zhou, S.; Cai, W.; Low, M.Y.H.; Tian, F.; Wang, Y.; Xiao, X.; Chen, D. Agent-based human behavior modeling for crowd
simulation. Comput. Animat. Virtual Worlds 2008, 19, 271–281. [CrossRef]
19. Kountouriotis, V .; Thomopoulos, S.C.; Papelis, Y. An agent-based crowd behaviour model for real time crowd behaviour
simulation. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 2014, 44, 30–38. [CrossRef]
20. Liu, S.; Wen, H. Agent-based modelling of polarized news and opinion dynamics in social networks: A guidance-oriented
approach. J. Complex Netw. 2024, 12, cnae028. [CrossRef]

===== PAGE 27 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 27 of 28
21. Flache, A.; Mäs, M.; Feliciani, T.; Chattoe-Brown, E.; Deffuant, G.; Huet, S.; Lorenz, J. Models of social influence: Towards the next
frontiers. JASSS—J. Artif. Soc. Soc. Simul. 2017, 20, 2. [CrossRef]
22. Axelrod, R. The dissemination of culture: A model with local convergence and global polarization. J. Confl. Resolut. 1997,
41, 203–226. [CrossRef]
23. Li, K.; Liang, H.; Kou, G.; Dong, Y. Opinion dynamics model based on the cognitive dissonance: An agent-based simulation. Inf.
Fusion 2020, 56, 1–14. [CrossRef]
24. Madey, G.; Gao, Y.; Freeh, V .; Tynan, R.; Hoffman, C. Agent-Based Modeling and Simulation of Collaborative Social Net-
works. In AMCIS 2003 Proceedings; Article 237, 2003. Available online: https://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2003/237 (accessed on 11
November 2024).
25. El-Sayed, A.M.; Scarborough, P .; Seemann, L.; Galea, S. Social network analysis and agent-based modeling in social epidemiology.
Epidemiol. Perspect. Innov. 2012, 9, 1–9. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Gilbert, N. Agent-based social simulation: Dealing with complexity. Complex Syst. Netw. Excell. 2004, 9, 1–14.
27. Leombruni, R.; Richiardi, M. Why are economists sceptical about agent-based simulations? Phys. A Stat. Mech. Its Appl. 2005,
355, 103–109. [CrossRef]
28. Deguchi, H. Economics as an Agent-Based Complex System: Toward Agent-Based Social Systems Sciences; Springer Science & Business
Media: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2011.
29. Rouchier, J. Agent-based simulation as a useful tool for the study of markets. In Simulating Social Complexity: A Handbook ;
Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2017; pp. 671–704.
30. Wang, L.; Ahn, K.; Kim, C.; Ha, C. Agent-based models in financial market studies. J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 2018, 1039, 012022.
[CrossRef]
31. Mueller, M.; Pyka, A. Economic behaviour and agent-based modelling. In Routledge Handbook of Behavioral Economics; Routledge:
London, UK, 2016; pp. 405–415.
32. Cabrera, E.; Taboada, M.; Iglesias, M.L.; Epelde, F.; Luque, E. Optimization of healthcare emergency departments by agent-based
simulation. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2011, 4, 1880–1889. [CrossRef]
33. Barnes, S.; Golden, B.; Price, S. Applications of agent-based modeling and simulation to healthcare operations management. In
Handbook of Healthcare Operations Management: Methods and Applications; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2013; pp. 45–74.
34. Perez, L.; Dragicevic, S. An agent-based approach for modeling dynamics of contagious disease spread. Int. J. Health Geogr. 2009,
8, 1–17. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
35. Silverman, B.G.; Hanrahan, N.; Bharathy, G.; Gordon, K.; Johnson, D. A systems approach to healthcare: Agent-based modeling,
community mental health, and population well-being. Artif. Intell. Med. 2015, 63, 61–71. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Beheshti, R.; Jalalpour, M.; Glass, T.A. Comparing methods of targeting obesity interventions in populations: An agent-based
simulation. SSM-Popul. Health 2017, 3, 211–218. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Elsenbroich, C.; Verhagen, H. Agent-Based Modelling and Public Health: An Introduction to the Proceedings of the 2023 Social
Simulation Conference. In Proceedings of the Conference of the European Social Simulation Association, Glasgow, UK, 4–8
September 2023; pp. 1–6.
38. Hauser, M.D.; Chomsky, N.; Fitch, W.T. The faculty of language: What is it, who has it, and how did it evolve? Science 2002,
298, 1569–1579. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
39. Gao, C.; Lan, X.; Li, N.; Yuan, Y.; Ding, J.; Zhou, Z.; Xu, F.; Li, Y. Large language models empowered agent-based modeling and
simulation: A survey and perspectives. Humanit. Soc. Sci. Commun. 2024, 11, 1–24. [CrossRef]
40. FTeam, 2022; Yoheinakajima. Babyagi. Available online: https://github.com/yoheinakajima/babyagi (accessed on 15 Decem-
ber 2024).
41. Schick, T.; Dwivedi-Yu, J.; Dessì, R.; Raileanu, R.; Lomeli, M.; Hambro, E.; Zettlemoyer, L.; Cancedda, N.; Scialom, T. Toolformer:
Language models can teach themselves to use tools. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 2024, 36, 68539–68551.
42. Chen, Z.; Tang, J.; Chen, X.; Lin, Y. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2308.11432.
43. Xi, Z.; Chen, W.; Guo, X.; He, W.; Ding, Y.; Hong, B.; Zhang, M.; Wang, J.; Jin, S.; Zhou, E.; et al. The rise and potential of large
language model based agents: A survey. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2309.07864.
44. Park, J.; Min, B.; Ma, X.; Kim, J. Choicemates: Supporting unfamiliar online decision-making with multi-agent conversational
interactions. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2310.01331.
45. Cipi, E.; Cico, B. Simulation of an agent based system behavior in a dynamic and unpredicted environment. Simulation 2011,
1, 172–176.
46. Fu, D.; Li, X.; Wen, L.; Dou, M.; Cai, P .; Shi, B.; Qiao, Y. Drive like a human: Rethinking autonomous driving with large language
models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, Waikoloa, HI, USA, 3–8
January 2024; pp. 910–919.
47. Gao, C.; Lan, X.; Lu, Z.; Mao, J.; Piao, J.; Wang, H.; Jin, D.; Li, Y. S3: Social-network Simulation System with Large Language
Model-Empowered Agents. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2307.14984. [CrossRef]

===== PAGE 28 =====
Systems 2025, 13, 29 28 of 28
48. Qian, C.; Cong, X.; Yang, C.; Chen, W.; Su, Y.; Xu, J.; Liu, Z.; Sun, M. Communicative agents for software development.arXiv
2023, arXiv:2307.07924.
49. Wang, L.; Zhang, J.; Chen, X.; Lin, Y.; Song, R.; Zhao, W.X.; Wen, J.R. RecAgent: A Novel Simulation Paradigm for Recommender
Systems. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2306.02552.
50. Li, N.; Gao, C.; Li, M.; Li, Y.; Liao, Q. Econagent: Large language model-empowered agents for simulating macroeconomic
activities. In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Bangkok, Thailand,
11–16 August 2024; Volume 1: Long Papers, pp. 15523–15536.
51. Gur, I.; Furuta, H.; Huang, A.; Safdari, M.; Matsuo, Y.; Eck, D.; Faust, A. A real-world webagent with planning, long context
understanding, and program synthesis. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2307.12856.
52. Xu, F.; Zhang, J.; Gao, C.; Feng, J.; Li, Y. Urban generative intelligence (ugi): A foundational platform for agents in embodied city
environment. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2312.11813.
53. Park, J.S.; O’Brien, J.; Cai, C.J.; Morris, M.R.; Liang, P .; Bernstein, M.S. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human
behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, Francisco, CA, USA,
29 October–1 November 2023; pp. 1–22.
54. Hua, W.; Fan, L.; Li, L.; Mei, K.; Ji, J.; Ge, Y.; Hemphill, L.; Zhang, Y. War and peace (waragent): Large language model-based
multi-agent simulation of world wars. arXiv 2023, arXiv:2311.17227.
55. Hu, Y.; Sherpa, G.; Zhang, L.; Li, W.; Bai, Q.; Wang, Y.; Wang, X. An LLM-enhanced Agent-based Simulation Tool for Information
Propagation. In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-24, Jeju, Republic
of Korea, 3–9 August 2024; pp. 8679–8682. [CrossRef]
56. Devlin, J. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1810.04805.
57. Holme, P .; Kim, B.J. Growing scale-free networks with tunable clustering. Phys. Rev. E 2002, 65, 026107. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
58. Muchnik, L.; Pei, S.; Parra, L.C.; Reis, S.D.; Andrade, J.S., Jr.; Havlin, S.; Makse, H.A. Origins of power-law degree distribution in
the heterogeneity of human activity in social networks. Sci. Rep. 2013, 3, 1783. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
59. Macqueen, J. Some methods for classification and analysis of multivariate observations. In Proceedings of the Fifth Berkeley
Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, Oakland, CA, USA, 21 June–18 July 1965; Volume 1, pp. 281–297.
60. Leskovec, J.; Sosiˇ c, R. Snap: A general-purpose network analysis and graph-mining library.ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol.
(TIST) 2016, 8, 1–20. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
61. Dickel, S.; Neumann, M. Hermeneutics of social simulations*: On the interpretation of digitally generated narratives. In An
Interpretive Account to Agent-Based Social Simulation; Routledge: Londin, UK, 2024; pp. 130–152.
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.